
   
   
      
         
            Harmonic Convergences
            

            You're right, Maxim's strong point is that it's totally unsentimental
and ungenteel. It's a sendup of the old model, but in a different way than,
say, Hustler was, and the difference (surprise) reflects the sexual
culture of the '90s. With its belligerent grossness and misogyny,
Hustler rebelled against the establishment men's mags' class
condescension, the earnest philosophizing about the sexual revolution, the
"thinking men's sex bomb" syndrome, at the same time that it was deliberately
goading feminists. It came right out with the anger that the regular men's mags
tried to hide. Maxim pokes fun at its progenitors but with considerable
ironic affection. It's not angry. In fact, while its fondness for the most
idiotic, juvenile humor knows no bounds, any strong emotion is taboo (unless
you count horror at having your penis mangled)--that's part of the British
influence, I guess. And feminism isn't an issue, at least not directly--partly
because its basic ideas have been assimilated and are taken for granted, partly
because politics in general and feminism in particular barely exist in the
consciousness of Maxim's age group. (Whereas Gear, which retains
certain elements of the old men's mag ethos, and the old hostility--and not
incidentally runs somewhat longer articles--does worry about and argue with
feminism, as in its recent piece on sexual repression in the military, in which
it is argued, after a fashion, that 1) we can't suppress male soldiers' urge to
rape and harass women without suppressing the urge to kill that's the
military's reason for being, 2) sexual harassment crusades interfere with
women's equality, 3) women soldiers aren't men's equals anyway, and 4) why do
we need women in the military in the first place?)

            Another thing I've noticed is that the trajectory of the new men's magazines
and that of contemporary women's magazines seem to be converging, at least
compared with 20 years ago. There used to be an enormous gulf between the sense
of entitlement to the good things of life, including women, that pervaded the
men's mags and women's anxious obsession with self-improvement in order to be
worthy of male attention. In young women's magazines now, Cosmo being
the paradigm, there's a much more bluntly instrumental, "male" attitude toward
getting sex of the quantity and quality desired. Beauty is as central a
preoccupation as ever, if anything more so, but the preoccupation has much more
of a narcissistic, self-pampering quality and less of a desperation to make up
for some irrecoverable, primal imperfection. In the men's magazines, there's
much more of a sense that if you want women to give you the time of day, you
have to make some effort to find out what they want and give it to them. In the
old model, if men needed advice on women or sex, they got it from a male expert
like the "Playboy Advisor." Now Maxim features advice from women on such
matters as how not to give the wrong impression on a first date.

            On the other hand, men still don't like to express anxiety directly--I'd
guess that part of the reason men's mags have gotten sillier is that they've
seized on men's time-honored method of covering up insecurity by clowning
around. Regarding your suggestion that these magazines give men a safe place to
be together without their heterosexuality being questioned: That sounds like
more of a hope (on their part) than a reality. Because it's ultimately
self-doubt that really matters, no place can really be safe--hence the
need to escalate the jokes.



         
   
   
      
         
            Bad-Boy Nostalgia
            

            Think your analysis is spot-on, Ellen. (How's that for a disincentive to
keep reading?) It's no coincidence that Golin had his apprenticeships at both
Men's Health and Cosmo, two magazines unlikely ever to be accused
of sentimentality or pretension. The crucial lesson taught by those two
publications, and successful mass-market mags in general, is a rigorous
anti-elitism: Esquire and GQ posit, explicitly or by inference,
that only winners will be let into their club. In this week's Advertising
Age, GQ editor Art Cooper asks why condom advertisers bother to take
out pages in Maxim, since the readership is composed entirely of
masturbators. I'm pretty sure Cooper was joking, but the dis was clear.
GQ="classy." Maxim=hopelessly déclassé. But who wants to be
classy anymore? The recent vogues for cigars, cocktails, and the Rat Pack were
not wistful evocations of a more civilized time; they were wistful evocations
of the last great period of big Straight White Guy fun, before the broads and
the fags came in to ruin it all. It was Sinatra's Pack's bad-boy behavior the
late-'90s ersatz swells are celebrating, not the fine tailoring on his
three-button suits.

            The tits in these magazines, likewise, are not there for the purpose of
"trouser-rousing" (as Details so delicately put it in its current
issue). The photos are rarely "hot" in the manner of pornography or even in the
manner of the Sports Illustrated tanned-fleshy swimsuit numbers. They
are more like '90s answers to the calender girls and pinups of the mid-century,
suggestive more than titillating, festive more than funky. The men's-mag
T&A is really about providing a kind of boys-only atmosphere in
which the complicated tradeoffs involved in three decades of negotiating with
women's lib can be neatly tuned out.

            This is not really anti-feminist, since much of the new laddism seems to be
coming at the behest of a new generation of Cosmo-trained sex-addled
fembots. How terrifying Monica Lewinsky's blithe attitude toward phone sex must
have been to the baby boomers. Hey, talking nasty to the president is just
fun. And how irrelevant is capital-F Feminism now that NOW et al. have
given a tacit thumbs up to the president's sexual harassment of an intern (an
issue that even three years ago would have provoked mau-mauing of the highest
order)? We've come a long way since Clarence Thomas.

            Indeed, feminism feels like a
dead letter both in magazines and in the culture at large .

         
      
   
   
      
         
            All the King's Men

            In the September Vanity Fair , profiler Marjorie Williams offers this
tasty Larry King anecdote:

            "One of the most oft told of the Larry Stories that circulate at CNN
concerns his take-out order when he eats dinner at his desk, before the show.
His favorite dish, from a local Chinese restaurant, is a chicken with
cashews--without the fat-laden cashews. When the food arrives, a young intern
or production assistant is charged with combing through it to remove any errant
nuts; then he or she has to swaddle the chicken in paper towels and squeeze out
any excess oil."

            A friend of Chatterbox's, who recalls his two-year tenure as King's Grease
Monkey, says that Williams got the story right, but underplays how loopy the
talk-show host is about his vittles.

            "I drained Larry's meat for almost two years while working for the show. The
intern/production assistant must open his cranberry juice and pour it over ice
for him, just so . He also wants the packets of hot mustard opened for
him and spread over the chicken. If he spots nuts or excess grease in his grub,
the show is ruined! During commercial breaks, he will harp about the botched
meal, unsettling the King crew and guest alike. The intern/production assistant
can only dive for cover."

            The retired Grease Monkey says that the only time there was absolute calm on
the set was when King went out to dinner.

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Picture This

            When the conservatives in Congress gutted the National Endowment for the
Arts, they predicted that art patrons from the private sector would come
forward to fill the ensuing culture gap. Balderdash, said the art community.
But proving them wrong are the conservatives at the American Enterprise
Institute, which commissioned three historical portraits by Minnesota artist
Mark Balma, to be unveiled next month at an AEI reception in the Cannon House
Office Building.

            Without actually viewing them, Chatterbox can't comment on whether or not
these are great paintings, but we are prepared to judge these works by their
titles:

            
               A Shared Vision pairs Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. Yes, they
were statesmen, bringing compromise and tact to everything that they did. Also,
they shared a vision, and are historical. Good job, AEI!

            
               Resolution, we're not so sure about. This painting depicts the Gulf
War All-Star starting five of George Bush, James Baker, Dick Cheney, Brent
Scowcroft, and Colin Powell. Historical, yes, but haven't all of the subjects
crawled under consulting/public-speaking/book-promoting rocks since the end of
the Bush administration? It might not be very good, but it's very big--a
whopping 144 square feet.

            Making the strongest argument for the return of the National Endowment is
The Four Statesmen, depicting everybody's favorite '70s political hacks:
Gerald Ford, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, James Callaghan, and Helmut Schmidt.

            Can we have Karen Finley and Piss Christ back, please?

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            There Once Was a Columnist From Nantucket

            August is the cruelest month for readers of the New York Times op-ed
page not on vacation. Listen to Russell Baker's Aug. 19 column about absolutely
nothing save the fact that he has summered on Nantucket for a long time: "It
used to be when you took the ferry out to Nantucket Island you were really out
of it....That was part of its charm." Baker goes on to complain about the
island's new popularity and the ostentatious displays of wealth. Less fortunate
readers may not quite share Baker's indignation.

            Under an Aug. 27 dateline of West Tisbury, Mass., that well-known news
hotspot, Ward Just takes the political pulse and finds Vineyarders less excited
about the president's visit this year. He also describes in detail his moments
on the island's Milk Meadows golf course. On the same page, under a Northeast
Harbor, Me., dateline, Paul H. Nitze contributes a piece ostensibly about
industrial smog. His lede: "For the past 60 years I have vacationed in Maine
during the summer."

            But the Times op-ed page, as it turns out, has subtle ways of
taunting work-bound readers. The Aug. 24 page offers straight-ahead pieces on
the UPS strike and on current understanding of the cosmos, but the datelines
are East Hampton, N.Y., and Chilmark, Mass. Given that the page doesn't publish
datelines for every op-ed, the reader can only sense that he is being
mocked.

            Even when pieces don't carry datelines, as is the case with A.M. Rosenthal's
column of Aug. 12, the section still finds a way to scald those still
straphanging in August's heat. "Lovely day at the shore--warmed by the sun,"
Rosenthal begins. "Then Jimmy Carter appears, bringing the shadow that travels
with him now."

            No, Jimmy hasn't just joined Abe at the beach. The 39th president--like the
reader--is an imagined presence.

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Don't Shoot! We're Animals!

            Never mind the ethics of paparazzi who torment celebrities. Bill
McKibben wants the commercial photographers who shoot wildlife to lay down
their Leicas.

            Writing in the fall issue of Doubletake--Robert Coles' slick magazine
of essays, photographs, reportage, and poetry--McKibben accuses commercial
wildlife photographers of needlessly stressing caribou and other critters by
stalking them by airplane. He also damns them for staging the "jillions to one"
pictures of emerald boas eating parrots because it creates false expectations
of what the wilderness is all about. Evidence that the public has gone mad on
wildlife photography can be found in Yellowstone Park, he says, where wildlife
porn (Chatterbox's phrase, not McKibben's) has convinced tourists that bears
are approachable beasts. In fact, bears that become habituated to people
usually end up getting snuffed by rangers because they become dangerous
pests.

            McKibben's solution? A moratorium on new commercial wildlife photography. He
calls on the top nature magazines and TV shows to pick a date and refuse to
purchase any photos taken after that. It's not as if there aren't enough
photographs. One magazine art director points out that she reviewed 10,000
slides of elephants a few years ago while planning a story on them.

            This isn't censorship, it's editing, McKibben writes. "Self-restraint is the
uniquely human gift, the one talent no other creature or community possesses
even as a possibility."

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Chatterdump

            Did Clinton-hating gossipmonger Matt Drudge actually do the president a
favor by forcing the Monica Lewinsky story out into the open before special
prosecutor Kenneth Starr could wire her up and get Clinton to say something
damaging on tape, as Starr apparently planned to do?...

            If Clinton has had affairs with dozens of women, where are all the women he
hit on and didn't have affairs with? Does he score every time? When Chatterbox
hits on women, its success rate is--well, let's not say what the rate is. But
it's less than 100 percent--less than 50 percent, even ...

            Which American is happiest about Clinton's current predicament? Chatterbox
nominates Gary Hart, who must have spent the past five years wondering how
Clinton got away with it ...

            Paranoid's corner: A few weeks after a front-page New York Times
story on the disappearance of lucrative speaking engagements for Washington
pundits, a huge scandal breaks that will surely revive demand for...speeches by
Washington pundits, who can now retail titillating tidbits ("Let me tell you
about the Vernon Jordan I know ...") Mere coincidence? Chatterbox's friend
Walter, who pointed this out, thinks not ...

            In 1994, defending President Clinton against right-wing hit man David Brock,
a liberal pundit wrote: "It would bother me greatly if Clinton was still
messing around after the 60 Minutes interview--let alone after the
election. That would reveal a brutal willingness to deceive the public--way
beyond the normal politicians' cynicism--as well as a frightening lack of
self-control ..." Who was the liberal pundit? Michael Kinsley, now

                  Slate's editor. Prepare to be bothered greatly, buddy ...

            Speaking of paranoia: In retrospect, maybe Hillary Clinton wasn't so crazy
to be concerned about ridding the White House of Bush holdovers when her
husband took office. One of those holdovers, Linda Tripp, made the tapes that
now threaten the Clinton presidency. Bet the Clintons wish they'd gotten rid of
her in 1993, along with the travel-office staff ...

         
      
   
   
      
         
            No Gore in '04

            The press bears a heavy burden of responsibility in the crisis now engulfing
the White House. It is imperative that we not get ahead of ourselves and that
we avoid a speculative rush to judgment ... Oh, what the hell. Let's speculate!
Suppose Clinton resigns next week, and Gore becomes president. If Chatterbox
reads the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution correctly, that means Gore can
only run for the presidency once, in 2000. (The 22nd Amendment says you can
only be elected president twice, and if you serve more than two years of a term
"to which some other person was elected" you can only be elected once.) If Gore
wants to maximize his potential years in the presidency, Clinton has to hang on
until at least Jan. 21, 1999, so Gore can serve less than two years of
Clinton's term and then two full terms of his own ... Of course, if Clinton
drags it out for another year and then quits, he'll probably be so unpopular
that he'll pull Gore down with him. And he'll deprive Gore of a crucial year in
which to build his own record of accomplishment.

            Memo to Martin Peretz, owner of the New Republic : You've
enthusiastically supported the ambitions of Gore, your former student--you've
said confidently that you intend to own the magazine until "the end of Al
Gore's second term" as president. You even sacked your magazine's editor,
Michael Kelly, at least in part because, in his "obsessive" (your term) attacks
on the character of the Clinton administration, Kelly ... how to put it ...
failed to completely appreciate Gore's virtues. If you've been reading the 22nd
Amendment too, it must now be tempting to use your magazine to at least help
prop Clinton up until the two-year deadline is past, so Gore can run twice. But
if the above analysis is correct, the last thing Gore needs is for Clinton to
dangle, injured, Nixon-like, for a year or two. You need to get rid of Clinton
now, even if it means Gore is a one-and-a-half-term president at best. The
obvious solution: Bring back Kelly! Go for the kill! ... Anyway, in retrospect,
hasn't Kelly's "obsessive" anti-Clintonism been a wee bit vindicated?

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Eight Questions About Monica, Etc.

            The writer Edward Jay Epstein has sent Chatterbox the following e-mail
message, subject: "Preliminary Concerns I Have About Monica and Other Babes
From Beverly Hills."

            
               1. Monica's roots may be relevant. Her mother, Marcia Lewis (a k a
Lewinsky), a former Hollywood Reporter reporter, wrote a book about "The
Private Lives of the Three Tenors." In the cover blurb, to help sell books, she
teasingly suggests that she had an affair with Placido Domingo. The claim was
false.

            
               2. Monica achieved her internship not through her scholarship at
Lewis & Clark College but through the intervention of Walter Kaye, who
donated enough to the Clinton campaign to be invited to sleep in the White
House. Was this the reason she later got Jordan's attention?

            
               3. Can anyone really believe Vernon Jordan, the ultimate Washington
insider (and survivor), would recklessly tell a 24-year-old to perjure herself
when he has so many safer, legal ways to achieve the same end? For example,
getting her a lawyer, who, like all lawyers, would let her know her full
scenario of options. (I can't.)

            
               4. Is it coincidental that prior to befriending Monica, Linda R.
Tripp had engaged a literary agent, Lucy Goldberg, who specializes in expos,s
of Clinton's sex life and had copies of the tapes? And what was Tripp's
interest in writing on the Vince Foster case?

            
               5. Did Tripp tip off the Paula Jones gang about Monica? If so, did it
lead to the following three events: 1) Monica called Clinton's secretary to
alert POTUS that she was about to be deposed. 2) Clinton returned the call on
her voice mail. 3) Clinton dispatched Jordan to find out why Paula Jones was
about to depose Monica.

            
               6. Would Jordan have helped Monica get a job at Revlon if he knew a)
she was about to perjure herself at his request and b) his help could be
construed as a bribe to facilitate the perjury? Or would he have helped her if
she assured him that she had had no affair with Clinton, and he was therefore
merely helping an ex-intern with fund-raising connections who, if disposed of
and deposed in a friendly manner, would be one less problem.

            
               7. Which elements of Monica's story suggest she is given to telling
the truth?

            a) Her affidavit: She never had sex with Clinton;
b) Her alleged statement to Vernon Jordan: She never had sex with
Clinton;
c) Her recorded statement: She always lies
d) Her recorded statement: She had sex with Clinton over a one-year period.

            
               8. Will it emerge that she had previously falsely charged that other
powerful men in her life, like her high-school and college professors, had had
sex with her?

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Stephanopoulos Analyzes His Own Crime

            There was former Clinton aide George Stephanopoulos on ABC's This
Week this morning, furrow-browed and "heartbroken with all the evidence
coming out" against the president. Last week, when the Lewinsky story was only
a few hours old, Stephanopoulos popped up on Good Morning America to
demonstrate his concern. "These are probably the most serious allegations yet
leveled against the president. There's no question that, if they're true, they
... could lead to impeachment proceedings."

            Is Chatterbox alone in thinking there is something strange and even
disgusting about Stephanopoulos' eager show of independence from the president?
The problem isn't so much his disloyalty. Political figures turn on each other
from time to time, for good and bad reasons; we're used to it. Stephanopoulos
wants to run for the Senate and doesn't want to seem a Clinton stooge. By
lending credence to the Lewinsky charges, and treating Clinton's familiar
defenses as the lies and half-lies they seem to be, Stephanopoulos shows he's
not a fool.

            The trouble is that Stephanopoulos himself helped propagate those lies in
the first place. During the 1992 campaign, when Gennifer Flowers first brought
Clinton's philandering to public attention, Stephanopoulos--as Clinton's chief
spinner, distracter, and all-around bullshit artist--played a crucial role in
discrediting Flowers and anyone else who tried to point out the truth, namely
that Clinton had a disturbing zipper problem. (Don't say Stephanopoulos didn't
know. Again, he's not a fool.) Simply put, Stephanopoulos did as much as any
man to get the country into the mess he now so telegenically laments.

            The 1993 documentary The War Room captures some of his efforts on
tape. Early in the film, with the Flowers crisis in full bloom, Sam Donaldson
interviews Stephanopoulos, who blames it all on the "Republican attack
machine." "Gov. Clinton has no character problem," Stephanopoulos declares.
Donaldson suggests that on 60 Minutes Clinton had admitted to
infidelity. "He said he had problems in his marriage," says Stephanopoulos,
correcting Donaldson's deviation from the pre-scripted fudge-phrase of the day.
(Today, of course, the president's defenders claim that Clinton admitted
infidelity on 60 Minutes and that the fully informed voters simply
didn't care.)

            Near the end of The War Room, Stephanopoulos gets a call from someone
who apparently claims to have a list of Clinton paramours, which he is about to
publicize. Stephanopoulos skillfully bullies and cajoles him into keeping
quiet. "You would be laughed at ..." he tells the caller. "I guarantee you that
if you do this you'll never work in Democratic politics again. ... Nobody will
believe you and people will think you're scum."

            You might say that Stephanopoulos helped invent the philander-protection
techniques that seem to have made Clinton so overconfident of his ability to
not get caught. He was one of Clinton's principal enablers, to use a word
employed by Maureen Dowd in today's New York Times . When Democrats
wonder why there is so much resentment of Clinton, they don't need to look much
further than the Big Lie about philandering that Stephanopoulos, Carville (and
a cooperative campaign press corps) helped to put over in 1992.

            Now the dissembler and enabler has become the scholar and ABC News analyst.
It's as if Roy Cohn went on television in the mid-'50s to soberly rue the
damage wreaked by Sen. Joe McCarthy, without any apology for his own role. Much
has been made of the way famous wrongdoers (e.g.: Dick Morris, Marv Albert)
rebound too quickly in our celebrity culture. But usually at least a nanosecond
of contrition is required. Stephanopoulos is cashing in without even going
through the minimal motions of holding himself accountable for misleading the
country. If Clinton, as is now increasingly clear, was a time bomb waiting to
explode, then Stephanopoulos helped smuggle him into the White House and
muffled the ticking.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            I Sing the Body Elected

            As everyone knows, President Clinton gave ex-intern Monica Lewinsky an
inscribed copy of Walt Whitman's Leaves of Grass . And a fine gift it
is--Chatterbox frequently gives this very volume to women with whom it is not
having sexual relations. But perhaps the book contained some deeper, more
personal meaning to the president or Ms. Lewinsky. 
                  Slate
               's crack
panel of Whitman scholars has convened in emergency session to draw our
attention (and that of the Independent Counsel) to the following passages:

            ARE you the new person drawn toward me?
    To begin with, take warning--I am surely far
        different from what you suppose;
    Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?
    Do you think it so easy to have me become your
        lover?
    Do you think the friendship of me would be
        unalloy'd satisfaction?
    Do you think I am trusty and faithful?
    Do you see no further than this facade--this smooth
        and tolerant manner of me?
    Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground
        toward a real heroic man?
    Have you no thought, O dreamer, that it may be all
        maya, illusion?

            --from "Are You the New person, drawn toward Me"

            Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so;
    Only what nobody denies is so.

            --from "Walt Whitman"

            I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for
        These States--I press with slow rude muscle,
    I brace myself effectually--I listen to no entreaties,
    I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long
        accumulated within me,
Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,

            --from "A Woman Waits for Me"

            Do I contradict myself?
    Very well, then, I contradict myself;

            --from "Walt Whitman"

         
      
   


   
   
      
         
            Chatterdump: How to Stop Drudge, Etc.

            
               THEY MAY have finally found a way to neutralize Matt Drudge--make him
famous! Since the Monica Mess broke, Drudge has apparently been so busy giving
interviews and making television appearances that he's had no time to write his
famed dispatches. The last one was Jan. 21...Did you notice on Meet the
Press how Drudge's face seems to curve from top to bottom like a giant
half-moon letter "C"? Peyronie's Disease of the chin?.... While Chatterbox
loves Drudge (except for that nasty Sidney Blumenthal business), on TV he does
come across as one mighty weird fellow...

            
               MUCH CHATTER about what a relaxed good mood Vice President Al Gore
was in when he showed up at a dinner last Wednesday honoring the Associated
Press. The Monica story had broken that morning...

            
               CHATTERBOX WAS GOING to predict that Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan of
New York would be the first prominent Democrat to suggest that Clinton might
have to resign....Really we were...But Moynihan beat us to the punch with his
declaration in the New York Post that Clinton could not survive
admitting an affair with Lewinsky. The Post said Moynihan's comments
"carry special clout" because "he is one of the Senate's most respected
members, seen as a leader on matters of ethics and values." In truth,
Moynihan's remarks were as predictable as the sunrise. He's been getting press
by stabbing Clinton in the back since before Clinton's election. Moynihan
endorsed Nebraska Sen. Bob Kerrey against Clinton in the 1992 primary. Later he
publicly undermined Clinton's health care plan. Then he undermined Clinton's
welfare plan. Anyone who reads Moynihan's recent book Miles to Go will
see he strongly dislikes, if not loathes the president. He may have good reason
for this disdain, but it means his resignation talk doesn't carry much weight
at all. He probably thought Clinton should resign before the Monica
scandal.... Like the anti-Republican "Republican analyst" Kevin Phillips,
Moynihan is a convenient figure reporters know they can count on for a
faux-contrarian remark...Who will be next to stick in the shiv? Chatterbox
predicts Kerrey, who knows he shouldn't but who won't be able to resist...

            
               DEPARTMENT OF GROVELING: Bill McMichael e-mails about a Chatterbox
item speculating that Gary Hart must be happy at Clinton's troubles: "That was
a very cheap shot against Hart, and my guess is that he is gloomy over the
whole mess, not experiencing any schadenfreude." If so, Hart is a bigger man
than Chatterbox. But Chatterbox magnanimously concedes McMichael has a
point....

            
               THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
                editorial page Monday goes on about
"anti-social personality disorder, as psychiatrists now call it," only to
conclude "in Mr. Clinton's case a strict diagnosis does not hold..."

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Who's on Top?

            A split in the commentariat: Writing in Time , Andrew Ferguson says
that if Clinton is driven from office it will be not be because he had an
adulterous affair while in the White House, but because "the girl is by many
definitions still a girl ... 21, fresh from college" and "decent people in
positions of power do not exploit the vulnerable for kicks." It will also be
because of "the kind of sex they had"--which Ferguson, following press accounts
of Monica's accounts, characterizes as "strictly one-way, designed for maximum
pleasure" of the president. Meanwhile, in The New Yorker , Larissa
MacFarquhar rejects the notion that Monica is a victim. She's "a college
graduate of twenty-one" who will at worst wind up with a great book deal. And
Clinton is "a babe" ...

            Who's right? MacFarquhar's historical scholarship is open to question. She
seems to believe Lewinsky got to "sleep with ... the President," something the
tapes actually contradict. As the girl who lives down the hall from Chatterbox
complains, "she gives him a blow job and then has to wait around in receiving
lines!" ... On the other hand, suppose Clinton had gone all the way and driven
Lewinsky wild with pleasure. Would that change Ferguson's mind? Probably not.
As for the age difference--well, wouldn't it be just typical of baby boomers
like Ferguson to define anyone younger than they are as immature, not quite
adult. ...

            Chatterbox believes the dynamics of human sexuality are complex and subtle,
and it's hard to tell who is taking advantage of whom at any one time. Clinton
may be a user, but you don't get driven from office for being a user. (Name a
successful pol who isn't.) He doesn't seem to have egregiously led Lewinsky on
with lies and fake JFK-style promises of love or matrimony, in the classic
male-asshole mode. Yes, he did talk of strains in his marriage and suggested
the he'd be "alone" after he left the White House. But that may have been the
truth. Overall, the situation must have been pretty clear. Chatterbox sides
with MacFarquhar, at least at this point in time. Neither Lewinsky nor Clinton
were victims. There were victims, but they are to be found outside the
relationship. ...

            Oh, yes: If true! Almost forgot.

         
      
   
   
      
         
            "Full-Service" Chatterdump

            
               HOW LONG can famed D.C.-Hollywood-N.Y. beauty Patricia Duff--former
spouse of movie executive Mike Medavoy and Revlon tycoon Ronald Perelman--stay
out of the Clinterngate mess? In Hit and Run , their highly-regarded
expose of the early-'90s Sony studio debacle, Nancy Griffin and Kim Masters
report as follows: "At a dinner party at a producer's home, which took place
after [Patricia] and Mike had slept in the Lincoln Bedroom, she told thePatricia later said she
gathering that Clinton was 'a full-service president.' 
meant to refer only to Clinton's hospitality, but her listeners didn't
interpret the remark that way." ...

            
               AN EMERGING DEFENSE of Clinton is that Linda Tripp's evidence is
somehow tainted because she's been out to get the president all along. But if
she were really out to get him, why would she have contradicted Kathleen
Willey's reported story that she (Willey) did not welcome Clinton's advances?
Tripp told Newsweek that Willey did not seem upset at the time, but
instead looked "flustered, happy and joyful." Certainly it would be more
damaging to Clinton if Tripp said Willey was distraught and angry, an obvious
victim of harassment. ... Also, why would Tripp, in order to get Clinton to
settle the Paula Jones lawsuit, have urged Lewinsky to tell Clinton that she
(Lewinsky) had been blabbing about their sexual encounters? Tipping Clinton off
would only help the president. Settling the Jones case would have helped him
too (avoiding the whole perjury issue). But it would also have gotten Tripp out
of testifying (and contradicting Lewinsky). Maybe Tripp is telling the truth
when she says she was really terrified of having to testify, not hell-bent on
destroying Clinton. ...

            
               WE LOVE HIM WHEN HE'S ANGRY: Is Chatterbox alone in feeling that
Clinton's State of the Union address was actually much more forceful because
the president seemed a little tense and pissed off--not doing his usual
ingratiating, good humored sales job. Something really seemed to be at stake.
...

            
               THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF TALK that Clinton has broken an "implicit pact"
with the American people that was struck after he confronted Gennifer Flowers'
allegations in his famous 1992 60 Minutes interview. But what exactly
was this unwritten deal? Many commentators (e.g., columnist Ellen Goodman,
Jonathan Alter of Newsweek ) seem to believe Clinton effectively promised
not to screw around again in the future. Andrew Ferguson of Time argues
that since the voters didn't care about Flowers, "an implicit bargain was
struck," which held that Clinton would only screw around with people "roughly
his own age," and do it discreetly. Chatterbox thinks Clinton believes the
implicit bargain was this: Since the voters didn't care about Flowers, they'll
let him get away with it again. That's the problem with those "implicit"
bargains. Memo to electorate: Next time get it in writing. ...

            
               SEEN ON A BULLETIN BOARD at Columbia University (honest!):

            INTERN WANTED FOR GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS

            ALL CC '99 AND CC '00 ELIGIBLE 15 HOURS PER WEEK/UNPAID

         
      
   

   
   
   
      
         
            What Did George Know and When Did He Spin It?

            ABC News analyst George Stephanopoulos is shocked, shocked to think that
Clinton's been screwing around! Or, rather, in his recent Newsweek essay
(Feb. 2 issue), he is "livid." He feels "betrayal." He doesn't "know whether to
be angry, or sad, or both." Stephanopoulos thus adopts the only defense he
has--a plea of ignorance--to the obvious charge (see, for example, Chatterbox
for 1/25) that he himself helped mislead the voters in 1992 when defending
Clinton against a variety of zipper-related charges.

            Poor trusting little George! During the 1992 campaign, however, this naivete
must have been rather hard to maintain. First, Stephanopoulos, rounded up
affidavits to squelch an article in Penthouse by groupie Connie Hamzy,
who said Clinton propositioned her in a Little Rock hotel in 1984. Then he
helped squelch an early Star story on Clinton's womanizing. Then he
participated in the vilification of Gennifer Flowers.

            Can it be true that Stephanopoulos entertained no serious doubts about
Clinton? Of course not. Newsweek's own book on the 1992 campaign,
Quest for the Presidency , reports "the secret suspicion, widely shared
in the campaign, that some of the rumors about the governor were true and that
the Flowers story might just be one of them." (Indeed, the core of Flowers'
account--that there was an affair--was confirmed during the campaign by one of
her roommates.) Later, according to the Newsweek book, Stephanopoulos,
James Carville, and Mandy Grunwald were so demoralized by Clinton's lack of
candor that they crashed on a bed together, "too numb with fatigue and despair
to speak."

            Even now, in his current Newsweek essay, Stephanopoulos--spinning his
own crisis of credibility--admits "I assumed without asking that something had
happened between" Clinton and Flowers. Well? Doesn't that mean he knew Clinton
was, at best, misleading and dissembling in his famous 60 Minutes
interview? If you persist in foisting a candidate on the nation in the face of
such doubts, it's a little much to cry "betrayal" later. If Stephanopoulos
didn't know all along, his self-enforced ignorance (why did he go on "without
asking"?) was the equivalent of the journalists' "reckless disregard of
truth."

         
      
   

   
   
   
      
         
            When Is a B___ J___ Not a B___ J___? etc.

            
               SUNDAY'S NEW YORK TIMES
                says the Monica mess appears to have
"blurred the boundaries between mainstream and tabloid news." Blurred? The
lines have actually crossed in at least one instance. Time magazine
semi-unflinchingly reported that Lewinsky said she could be "Special Assistant
to the President for b___ j___." The supermarket tabloid Star was
actually more decorous, describing Lewinsky's fantasy job title as "Special
assistant to the president for (oral sex)." Even that was too much for the
hoity-toity tabloid Globe , which said only that "Monica joked about her
alleged romance by saying that she was 'special assistant to the president.'"
That Monica! ....

            
               WITH MONICA WOBBLING SLOWLY IN THE WIND , the Kathleen Willey incident
may now assume more importance. Do people realize just how creepy Clinton's
behavior was, if the worst reported details of Willey's testimony are true?
Here is a woman whose husband has been caught misappropriating funds, who must
find a way to repay $274,000 within days. She's desperate (indeed, her husband
would commit suicide before the deadline). She needs a job. She goes to see the
president, who at this moment of temporary advantage takes her into a side room
and gropes her breast and puts her hand on his genitals, saying he "always
wanted" to do that. If true, this is not a consensual affair with Gennifer
Flowers, or even a tryst with an employee like Monica Lewinsky. This is
casting-couch piggishness of a sort that would make Bob Packwood blanch.
...

            
               WHAT IF CLINTON manages to survive? Consider the psychological
effects on three groups of Washington characters:

            1) The Right Wing Conspirators: They thought they had him, but he slipped
away again. Contempt for the electorate (and democracy) among this group will
skyrocket. Some already seem practically ready to pick up the gun and join
militias.

            2) The Media Elite: Scan the talk shows. Who among the commentariat actually
believes Clinton? Practically nobody. The Punditburo has reached its decision,
but viewers don't want to hear it. The same goes for your average
inside-the-Beltway political reporters. Nearly all of them think Clinton is
blatantly lying, but they are constrained by popular demand and the additional
strictures of "objectivity." The inevitable result? The press will take it out
on Clinton in other ways, on more permissable, more substantive topics. If,
say, his Medicare numbers don't add up, expect him to be roasted for it with a
ferocity explicable only by reporters' frustration over what they perceive as
the Big Lie about sex.

            3) The Clintonistas: The most intriguing case. They may or may not believe
the Big Lie, but they can never admit it in public. Maybe they can't admit it
even to themselves. Just as old lefties could never concede that Alger Hiss was
guilty and Kennedy hands must keep downplaying evidence of JFK's recklessness,
they'll keep on spouting the spin. Further study will be required on the
long-term psychological impact of this denial, a condition known clinically as
Sorenseniasis. Sidney Blumenthal and Paul Begala, this means you! ...

            Chatterbox always wanted to do that.

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Chatterbox Buries the Lead!

            
               MANY OF CHATTERBOX'S COLLEAGUES were impressed with Jane Fritsch's
analysis, in last Sunday's New York Times "Week in Review" section, of
exactly where the various parts of the Monica scandal come from. Chatterbox
thought it was a festival of cheap shots. For example, Fritsch implicitly
chastises Newsweek because the tape transcripts it printed "took six and
a half minutes to read aloud," when the entire tape was 90 minutes long. So
Newsweek was supposed to print all the boring parts about shopping? Did
the Times print every minute of every Nixon tape during Watergate, or
only the relevant parts? Fritsch also charges that Newsweek "left the
impression that Newsweek staff members had heard tapes containing all of
the most serious and salacious" accusations -e.g. about oral sex. Chatterbox,
for one, did not get that impression. Finally, Fritsch chastises the Los
Angeles Times for reporting that two Arkansas troopers had told its
reporters in 1993 that Clinton thought oral sex wasn't adultery. "The newspaper
had never before printed those five-year old comments from the unnamed
troopers," Fritsch sniffs. Of course, if the Los Angeles Times had
rushed those charges into print five years ago, Fritsch would probably have
been the first to call it irresponsible. And clearly "five-year old comments"
are more credible today than comments made recently, in the middle of a
feeding frenzy, would be. ...

            
               CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE: Chatterbox is a friend of Michael
Isikoff's, whom it worships like a god. And Chatterbox recently applied for a
job at Newsweek. For some reason they've been too busy to return the
call. ...

            
               CREDIBILITY-ENHANCING ANTI- NEWSWEEK ITEM: 
               Newsweek
reprinted something that looks like the famous Lewinsky-Tripp "talking points"
in its Feb. 2 issue. The document appears to have been typed on a manual
typewriter. Aha! thought Chatterbox--whoever wrote them was so worried about
keeping them secret that he or she pecked them out by hand--perhaps on a
replica of Alger Hiss' old Woodstock! But no. Chatterbox has learned that what
Newsweek printed was...let's say a reenactment of what a more
photogenic version of the talking points might look like, presumably as cooked
up by the magazine's art department. Apparently the real talking points look
more like they came out of a laser printer.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Kathleen Willey Grope 'n' Gripe Extravaganza!

            
               A FEW MORE POINTS about the Kathleen Willey incident. As noted in
yesterday's Chatterbox, if true Willey's story is the worst of Clinton's
alleged sexual indiscretions--worse than Lewinsky, worse than Paula Jones. But
is Willey telling the truth? In his original Newsweek article on the
Willey/Willy business, reporter Michael Isikoff said Willey's "friend" Julie
Steele initially confirmed Willey's account, saying she (Steele) had heard the
gruesome details from Willey the night of the incident. But in the same article
Isikoff reported that Steele had later recanted and said that Willey "had asked
her to 'lie' about what had happened in order to give credibility to the
allegation that she had been harassed." According to Isikoff, Steele now said
that Willey only told her that "the president had made a pass at her," and not
until weeks after the incident. ...

            
               ARE WE TO BELIEVE Steele's recantation? Or had the same Mystery
Suborner who gave Monica Lewinsky anti-Willey "talking points" to give to Linda
Tripp--"you now do not believe that what she claimed happened really happened.
You now find it completely plausible that she herself smeared her
lipstick"--also given them to Steele, with greater success? Chatterbox has no
idea what the answer is. Steele's testimony will clearly now be very important.
But the mere existence of the "talking points" casts a retrospective cloud over
her semi-exculpatory recantation. ...

            
               STEELE'S NEW ACCOUNT is only "semi-exculpatory" because she did tell
Isikoff that Willey had talked to her about Clinton making a pass (just not an
unwanted pass). The New York Times , rehashing Isikoff's reporting
in a front-page piece last Saturday, conveniently omitted this point, leaving
the false impression that the first Steele had heard about any Clinton
pass was when Willey called to ask her to lie when Isikoff "was on his way to
her home." ...

            
               ONE ANTI-WILLEY CONSIDERATION is this: her husband apparently stole
about $274,000 of a client's money and didn't repay it. Instead, with the
repayment deadline looming, he committed suicide. Kathleen Willey got $1
million in insurance money after his death, and apparently didn't give
any of it to the poor client whose money was stolen. Indeed, she has
fought through protracted legal proceedings to successfully stiff him. Is
Chatterbox alone in finding this behavior deeply troubling? ...

            
               DESIGNATED SCANDAL VILLAIN LINDA TRIPP , of course, told Isikoff that
when she ran into Willey after Willey's Oval Office encounter, Willey looked
"flustered, happy, and joyful"--not harrassed. But is Tripp's account really
all that incompatible with Willey's? Even if Clinton had made an unwanted
grope, Willey still could have looked "flustered and happy" afterwards, and
maybe even have failed to tell Tripp she was at some level appalled. After all,
it must be a heady thing for the president make a pass at you, even an unwanted
pass--though Chatterbox has no personal experience in this department. Willey
may have been "joyful" that she was going to get the job she desperately
wanted. Even if Clinton's behavior was piggish, it's a bit unfair to expect
Willey to get instantly angry and dress down the president of the United States
as if he were the heavy in some "How to Stop Sex Harassment" training
video.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Name That Scandal: And the Winner Is ...

            Chatterbox has harnessed the vast power of the Net in search of a handy,
irresistible name for the Lewinsky-Tripp-Willey-Clinton scandal, and
Chatterbox's pathetic little hard drive now overflows with the results--more
than 215 responses, containing no less than 209 distinct suggestions. All we
can say is, For God's sake, stop! The contest is over!
            

            Explicitly disobeying Chatterbox's instructions, many entries contained the
despised "-gate" suffix, including the three most popular entries--"Fornigate"
(23 submissions), "Tailgate" (13), and "Zippergate" (12). Despite the
insubordination, Chatterbox actually likes each of these; "Fornigate" may well
wind up the name that wins out in popular usage. But somehow we can't see the
New York Times adopting it. So Chatterbox will pass over these excellent
entries, taking the advice of contest entrant Jonathan Weisberg to look for a
name that might at least conceivably wind up in a high-school history book.
Plus, Chatterbox doesn't want to have to buy the 23 copies of Leaves of
Grass it would take to reward the Fornigate brigade.

            Several other entries also fail the "history book" test. "Whitefluid" is too
dirty for anyone except Slate's Scott Shuger to use, as are "Pussygate,"
"Billygoat," "Deep Throat," "Starr 69," and one of Chattterbox's favorites,
"Come-a-lot," with its evocative, ironic historical reference. (Some Chatterbox
readers seem to have spent a bit too much time going through the X-rated bins
down at the video store.) The same goes for "Moby Dick," despite the useful
allusion to Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's Ahab-like pursuit of proof of
the president's sinfulness. Chatterbox also likes "Incredible Sucking Sound,"
but doesn't want to annoy Ross Perot. Anyway, wasn't it a "giant sucking
sound"?

            "Daughtergate" is cute but ugly. "Interncourse" doesn't exactly flow easily
off the tongue, while "Wag the Intern" rests too heavily on an ephemeral
pop-culture reference that will be lost on future generations. "Potus
Interruptus" is pretty good, but too long for convenient headline usage. The
same goes for "Intern Explorer," which might also attract unwanted scrutiny
from the Department of Justice's antitrust division. Chatterbox likes "The
Johnson Presidency," "Sexpot Dome," and "Nookiegate," the last so reminiscent
of New York Observer writer Philip Weiss' prescient admonition to the
press: "Follow the nookie." But no.

            Some of the entries are too awful to actually list here. Here is a list of
them: "Ejacugate," "Whit 'n' tits," "Suck 'n' duck," "Fellation Conflagration,"
"Clintonlingus," and "Spewinsky." One reader offered "Lobster Thermidor," which
required a long explanation (you don't want to know). Chatterbox was puzzled by
another entry: "Screw You." One or two brilliant entries may have been lost
because they were MIME. (Chatterbox is non-MIME, though it doesn't make a big
deal of it.)

            Numerous entries played on the names of the special prosecutor
("Starr-gate," "Starr Chamber," "Starr Trek," "Starr Grazing") and the
scandal's mad secret taper ("Trippwire," "Tripplash"). "Starr Tripp" combines
both names nicely. But Chatterbox believes neither Starr nor Linda Tripp will
go down in history as the scandal's central figures--although "Trippwire,"
submitted by at least four readers, actually packs quite a bit of info about
the scandal into a small package.

            That leaves a few slightly more anodyne but serviceable (sorry) entries.
Both "The Clintern Scandal" and "The Clintern Affair" will do fine. "The
Lewinsky Affair" fits in with the American tradition of naming scandals after
unlucky people or objects, and it sounds great in French. But Chatterbox
prefers "Flytrap." It's short. It makes at least a bit of a joke. It can
accommodate the possibility that Clinton yielded to temptation as well as the
(not completely incompatible) possibility that the whole thing was a vicious
setup. And it was only submitted by one reader, as far as Chatterbox can
tell.

            So Chatterbox wanders off into El Nino in search of the sole remaining copy
of Leaves of Grass in the National Capital Area to send to "Susan" at
Index Publishing Group in San Diego. Congratulations. Thanks as well to all who
dared to share their good and, more courageously, their bad ideas.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            WAPO BURIES THE LEAD!

            The juiciest bit of news in Saturday's Washington Post was entombed
in the last paragraphs of a story on page A-21. The piece, by media reporter
Howie "The Beast" Kurtz, revealed that Clinton attorney David Kendall has "been
helping" an Esquire author "research an article on Starr's Whitewater
probe," even to the extent of asking Clinton allies to cooperate with the
author. And the favored author is ... David Brock!

            That wouldn't be the same David Brock who wrote a 1992 American
Spectator hit piece calling Anita Hill "a bit nutty and a bit slutty,"
would it? The David Brock whose 1993 Troopergate article revived the Clinton
sex scandal and portrayed Kendall's client and patron Hillary Clinton as a
foul-mouthed bitch who orders state troopers to fetch her tampons? The David
Brock whose subsequent book about Hillary practically called her a Commie? The
nipple-baring Brock who then played the victim in an Esquire article
(illustrated with an exhibitionistic photo of Brock in an open shirt posing as
St. Sebastian) when, despite his hit pieces and sleazy red-baiting, right
wingers snubbed him for supposedly going soft on Hillary? (He concluded, for
example, that Bill and not Hillary was to blame in Whitewater.) The David Brock
who even in this Esquire article defended his Troopergate snooping? The
David Brock whom Chatterbox last tracked palling around Georgetown with Clinton
nemesis Matt Drudge? ...

            Chatterbox is pausing to un-reel its mind ... There. Just one question. Has
David Kendall gone insane? ... OK, one more question: Is Brock's whole I-was-a
victim-of-the-right routine a brilliant Nosenko-like cover that has allowed him
to penetrate the Clinton camp's innermost recesses--gaining the confidence of
the normally closed-mouthed Kendall--after which Brock will turn the tables on
his original enemies? True, one interpretation of Brock's recent anti-right
attack is that he's undergone a "metamorphosis" (Kendall's word). But another
is that he knows the publicity-grabbing value of a strategic conversion to a
contrarian position. What will the self-promoting, contrarian conclusion be
when his Esquire piece comes due? ... For Jacob Weisberg's critical
review of Brock's Hillary book (Weisberg says Brock "slings enough mud to drown
a Bangladeshi village") click here.

            
               KURTZ'S SECOND JUICY TIDBIT is that the White House nickname for
conspiracy-minded Clinton defender Sidney Blumenthal is "G.K.," which stands
for "grassy knoll." ... But enough filching from Kurtz:

            ********CHATTERBOX INTERGALACTIC EXCLUSIVE********

            Must credit CHATTERBOX or feel its mighty wrath.

            ***EXCLUSIVE***

            Chatterbox has learned that Monica Lewinsky's mother, Marcia Lewis, used
certain familiar epithets to describe her husband, Bernard, when she divorced
him back in the late 1980s. The epithets? The Creep and El
Schmucko ... the very same phrases daughter Monica would later reportedly
use to describe President Clinton on the scandalous Tripp tapes! ... Clinton
defenders could of course use this info to portray Monica as a deluded
fantasist who is just borrowing her mother's story for her imaginary tale ...
Take it away, G.K.! ... Oops. Chatterbox forgot. You're portraying Monica as
the sympathetic victim-of-Starr this week ... Well, you can savage her next
week, then!

            With the Washington Post's report that Linda Tripp met with Paula
Jones' lawyers the night before Clinton's deposition, the winner of
Slate's recent Name-That-Scandal Contest--"Flytrap"--becomes more apt
than ever ... Chatterbox is already saving up for its "The Snitch Set Him Up!"
T-shirt ... Does that come in long?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Do You Have Any Interns in That Basket?

            The press seems to have largely bought the idea that Clinton's personal
secretary Betty Currie has strongly denied the New York Times story of
Feb. 6, which suggested that Clinton had called Currie into work on a Sunday to
help shape her potential testimony about Monica Lewinsky. The Minneapolis
Star Tribune , for example, said that Currie's lawyer had issued "a strongly
worded statement saying his client was in no way coached by Clinton to provide
misleading testimony." The Boston Globe repeated the "not coached"
formula. On CNN, Jeff Greenfield suggested that the statement of Currie's
lawyer was the sort of categorical denial that Clinton himself should make.

            Wait a minute! Let's take another look at exactly what Currie's lawyer
said:

            "I want to be absolutely clear, to the extent there is any implication or
the slightest suggestion that Mrs. Currie believes that the President or anyone
else tried to influence her recollection, that is absolutely false and a
mischaracterization of the facts. I am shocked and dismayed by the numerous
leaks regarding Mrs. Currie's grand jury testimony."

            Can you spot the Clintonistic fudge in that paragraph? That's right, the key
word is "recollection." Currie isn't really denying that Clinton was trying to
coach her. She just denies that he was trying to change her
recollection . Of course he wasn't. Currie presumably recalls perfectly well
where she was when Clinton was with Monica in the Oval Office. She was in her
office next door, most likely. Clinton's not trying to get her to think she was
somewhere else. But, as has been widely speculated, he could have been trying
to get her to testify that Lewinsky wasn't "alone" with him because Currie was
within "shouting distance." In other words, he was merely schooling her in the
special Clintonian definition of "alone," as in "I was never alone in a hotel
with her."

            Since the statement of Currie's lawyer was drafted at the request of
Clinton's lawyers, you can bet each word was carefully weighed and vetted. If
Currie had really been denying Clinton tried to influence her testimony, she
would have said Clinton didn't try to influence her testimony , not her
"recollection."

            The Currie statement offers a good example of a major species of Clinton
weasel: The strong denial of something weak. Clinton's lawyers hope you will be
so snowed by the phrases "absolutely" and "slightest suggestion" that you won't
notice that what is being "absolutely" denied isn't all that much.

            The only other statement released by Currie's lawyer contains a subtler
Clintonism: Currie is not "aware of any legal or ethical impropriety by
anyone." But of course she might not be "aware" that a semantic discussion on
what is meant by "alone" was improper. After Currie's lawyer issued this
statement, Clinton himself employed the Strong/Weak trick to great effect,
saying he was "pleased that Ms. Currie's lawyers stated unambiguously this
morning--unambiguously--that she's not aware of any unethical conduct."

            Clinton's answers in the Flytrap scandal remind Chatterbox of nothing so
much as an old routine by the British comedy group Beyond the Fringe, parodying
Bertrand Russell's televised reminiscences. In the sketch, Russell confronts
his neighbor, the philosopher G.E. Moore, who is sitting by the fire with a
basket on his knee. "Moore, do you have any apples in that basket," asks
Russell. "No," replies Moore. "Moore, do you then have some apples in that
basket?" asks Russell. "No," replies Moore. Russell's final lines:

            "'Moore,' I said, 'do you then have apples in that basket?' 'Yes,' he
replied, and from that day forth we remained the very closest of friends."

            
               HYPED STORY OF THE WEEK : That would be Time magazine's account
of the testimony of Julie Steele, erstwhile friend of Kathleen Willey. "Now,
another key witness could end up doing [Paula] Jones more harm than good,"
report Jay Branegan and Viveca Novak in Monday's issue. They note that Jones
had hoped to use Willey's tale that Clinton had made an unwelcome advance in
1993. "But sources tell Time that Julie Hiatt Steele, once a close
friend of Willey's, signed an affidavit last Friday, at the request of
Clinton's lawyers, suggesting that the encounter may have been more innocent
than Willey claims and that Willey asked her to lie about it." Time then
dramatically recounts how Steele says she was called by Willey and asked to lie
even as Newsweek reporter Michael Isikoff "was on his way to Steele's
house."

            Sounds important, and Time's readers could be forgiven for getting
the impression that the magazine had discovered something new. Trouble is,
Steele's recantation, and the accusation against Willey, was not new at all. It
was reported last August in Isikoff's original Newsweek story on Willey.
The whole saga, including the dramatic call while Isikoff was in transit, was
also reported in the New York Times two weeks ago, on Jan. 31. (See
Chatterbox for Feb. 3.) The only new element in the Time story was that
Steele has now signed an affidavit saying what everyone thought she would say
since last August.... Plus Steele's lawyer (and Time ) fudge on the not
insignificant question of whether Willey has consistently said that Clinton
made a pass--wanted or unwanted--at her. Time reports that Steele was
"left with the impression that there was nothing more than 'mutual affection,'"
...

            
               CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE : Chatterbox was blown off recently
when it sought employment at Time .... The bitter ravings of a
disgruntled reject, or trenchant media analysis? You, the reader, make the
call! .... For its part, Chatterbox absolutely and unambiguously denies any
implication or the slightest suggestion that it was aware that any part of this
item was solely influenced by any lack of mutual affection with Time . It
goes without saying that Chatterbox is also shocked and dismayed.

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Views You Can Use!

            The newsweeklies are choosing up sides in Flytrap. Time is Monica's
Magazine. Ms. Lewinsky's increasingly creepy mouthpiece, William Ginsburg,
cooperates with Time reporters--witness this week's long, generally
sympathetic piece on "Monica's World," which portrays Ginsburg as her
"surrogate dad" and describes, presumably on some authority, the ex-interns own
thoughts (e.g., "You didn't do anything wrong!"). But Ginsburg has frosted
Newsweek , which is perceived to be in Linda Tripp's camp. A short
critical Newsweek piece on Ginsburg and his "appetite for the high life"
notes that he "declined ... to talk to Newsweek ".... Newsweek ,
meanwhile, is Paula's Magazine. Indeed you could plot the array of competing
newsmagazine allegiances:

            

               

                  
                     
                        Newsweek
                     
Linda Tripp
Paula Jones
Kathleen Willey
Vernon Jordan

                   

                  
                     
                        Time
                     
Monica Lewinsky
Bill Clinton
Julie Steele
Vernon Jordan

               

            

            There's nothing necessarily sinister about these match-ups. It's a natural
ecological phenomenon. If one mag has locked up the sources in one camp--the
journalists' supply of food, as it were--it's only sensible for a competing mag
to quickly secure the competing food source. Readers should simply be aware, as
they weigh what they are told, that each magazine has an incentive to
please--or at least not totally piss off--its primary allies....

            Which is not to say that Newsweek still won't try to throw Ginsburg a
few bones in the hope of gaining his cooperation, or that Time won't
skillfully let him make a fool of himself. In "Monica's World," for example,
Ginsburg says of his client: "I was there at the beginning. I kissed that
girl's inner thighs when she was six days old--I said 'Look at those little
polkas '." What's that all about? Chatterbox is getting Freudian
overload ... Ginsburg is also heard boasting "I truly am the avuncular Mr.
Ginsburg," and he condescendingly predicts that "the American people will let"
President Clinton "limp to the end of his term." Mighty avuncular of you, Mr.
G!

            
               WOULD YOU BELIEVE HE LUSTED IN HIS HEART?: 
               
                  Slate's
editors are among those who have been privileged to receive the White House
trial-balloon explanation of Clinton's "complicated" friendship with Monica
Lewinsky. You know, he may have had an ... er, avuncular , implicitly
sexual and probably inappropriate relationship that was, alas, never actually,
physically consummated ... Call it the "modified limited hangout" strategy
...

            
               CHATTERDUMP: Oliver North, running for president? Yes! declare
Republican rumormongers ... And people say Chatterbox has no right-wing
sources! ... Why is Kenneth Starr wasting time waging a big fight with Clinton
aide Bruce Lindsey over whether Lindsey's testimony is protected by "executive
privilege"? Does anybody really think that even if Lindsey is required to
answer every question, he'll actually incriminate Clinton? At best, he'll say
"I don't recall"... A joke that produces consistent hilarity at Washington
parties: Why did Clinton have to get blowjobs from Monica Lewinsky? Because Sid
Blumenthal hadn't joined his staff yet! ... But seriously, Chatterbox wants to
defend "Grassy Knoll" Blumenthal against those who trash him for giving advice
to his friends the Clintons while he was still a writer for The New
Yorker . Blumenthal was writing for an opinionated magazine, after all, if
not for a New Republic -style "magazine of opinion." He gave his opinions
to his readers. He gave his opinions to the Clintons. Where's the conflict? If
the Clintons call to get Chatterbox's advice, they'll get it!... The problem,
in principle, would come if Blumenthal was giving different opinions to the
Clintons and to his readers (something he's not accused of) or if Blumenthal's
readers were somehow misled into thinking they were getting a dispassionate
perspective. But any New Yorker subscriber who didn't realize that
Blumenthal was massively ego-invested in the Clintons' success just wasn't
paying attention ... Chatterbox hopes this stout defense won't stop Blumenthal
from ordering the Clinton critic-intimidation team to investigate Chatterbox's
private life. What fun! What publicity! ... For the record, Chatterbox has
never done anything avuncular, though it tried once in college ...

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Why Chatterbox Cares

            Is Chatterbox obsessed with Flytrap? Yes. Is this obsession justified?
Chatterbox's pro-Clinton friends, along with Anthony Lewis, Molly Ivins,
everyone associated with the movie Primary Colors , and the American
people speaking as one, say no. Even Chatterbox's guru, Charles "Bhagwan"
Peters of the Washington Monthly, one of the few journalists who gave
credence to the Gennifer Flowers tapes early on, argues that the voters rightly
don't care much about Flytrap because they've known the rough contours of
Clinton's character for years.

            Let's concede what the voters apparently believe: Clinton has been a good
president, especially considering the alternatives. Chatterbox fully expects
that within weeks of his leaving office--whenever that happens--we'll want him
back. So why care about Monica? Four reasons, in order of ascending
impeachability:

            1) The ease of his corruption: We knew Clinton had affairs and lied
about them to the press and public. We didn't quite know the unhesitating grace
with which--if the current charges are true--he orchestrates a campaign to
deceive the courts. Hey, honey, you don't have to turn over those gifts if you
no longer have them in your possession! (It was especially shocking to see
New York Times columnist Anthony Lewis, who worships the legal process
and has taught at Harvard Law, glide smoothly over the distinction between
lying to your friends and lying under oath.) True, if Clinton lies about sex
that doesn't mean he necessarily lies about Social Security. The slope isn't
all that slippery. But it's a slope. Does anyone doubt that if Clinton lied
under oath about sex he also lied about Whitewater? About what was given in
exchange for campaign contributions? Maybe it stops somewhere, but where?

            2) The overconfidence: What kind of alarmingly self-deluded
defendant, knowing what Clinton must have known about his own behavior, would
have failed to settle the Paula Jones case? So she upped her demand to $2
million? Pay it! There is a failure of judgment here. One day Clinton's
hypertrophied faith in his ability to pull anything out of the fire with a
flurry of last-minute salesmanship will prove wrong. Actually, it's already
been proven wrong, since the election, on the "fast track" trade issue, and
maybe on Iraq.

            3) The role mottle: Christopher Hitchens has complained about the
annoying, cloying quality of the modern babble about "role models." He's right.
Unfortunately Hitchens didn't design the human brain, which learns by
imitation. As Chatterbox's Darwinian mentor, Robert Wright, notes, we give our
presidents a lot, and in exchange we ask them to be a little better in
the moral example department than the rest of us. (See this piece by
Wright for the basic Darwinian story.) Does Clinton want to restore the family
in the ghettos? That will require suppressing the very impulses that Clinton
himself has so conspicuously failed to control.

            4) Social equality: Clinton's defenders--including those ordinary
focus-grouping Americans--offend the most when they suggest that a certain
latitude in moral and criminal matters goes with the president's exalted
position. Director Mike Nichols says "men who get a lot accomplished have
powerful libidos. What's the problem?" The big chief gets many women! That's
been true through most of human history. It's not supposed to be true in
America. America, in this sense, is a conspiracy against human nature--and not
just in that we expect monogamy when the rule of history has been polygamy.
More perversely, we also expect social equality--nobody is better than anyone
else, we all play by the same rules--when the characteristic of previous human
society has been the instinctive ranking by status. What Clinton is saying is
that he doesn't have to play by the same rules. He's too important to be sued
while in office. He's too important to be subject to the intrusive,
out-of-control sex harassment inquiries that bedevil his subjects. He boosted
the GNP and brought us disaster relief, and we should be grateful and shower
him with fleshy offerings. ("Hey, man, what's the fuss about? He gave a blow
job to the economy" is the man-on-the-street interview Chatterbox expects to
see any moment now.)

            Chatterbox always suspected that Democrats who focus compulsively on the
income charts (ex-Labor Secretary Robert Reich, for one) would be all too
willing to trade off America's precious social equality for a minor increase in
income equality and prosperity. Now Clinton is making that deal explicit. An
impeachable sin? Maybe. Maybe not. But (more than reasons 1 through 3) it goes
to the fundamental character, not of Clinton but of our national
enterprise--something that's worth impeaching even a good president to
preserve.

            Chatterbox has spoken!

            
               IT'S EVERYWHERE: Note that Clinton's ultimate sin--the sin of
corporatism, of seeing society as a single body with individual human
components performing different social functions and having different, unequal
rights--is the same as Kenneth Starr's sin. Starr thinks his role is so goddamn
important that his prosecutors get a special right to criminalize free speech
as "obstruction of justice." Less obviously, Clinton's sin is the same one
reporters commit when they denounce Starr for impeding "our ability to gather
information for the public"--as if the press were a separate institution with
special privileges and (inevitably) obligations, the eyes of the social corpus
nobly gathering information on behalf of poor, ignorant citizens. Better to
stick to the social-egalitarian line: Reporters are citizens, with the
same rights and obligations as other citizens (same as Sid Blumenthal, same as
Matt Drudge, same as your mother), which include the right to say nasty things
about Kenneth Starr.

         
      
   


   
   
      
         
            Did I Dis Sid? I Did!

            Is Chatterbox crazy to think Sidney Blumenthal didn't get enough
favorable publicity after he was forced to appear before Kenneth Starr's grand
jury to tell prosecutors whether he was saying nasty things about them? The
subpoena was, after all, just as outrageous as the commentariat said it was.
(Does Pepperdine law school really want to give its deanship to someone who
doesn' t know the first thing about the First Amendment?) Yet when Blumenthal
finally testified last Thursday, and then denounced Starr from the courthouse
steps, NBC correspondent David "Excitable Boy" Bloom poisoned Blumenthal's
sound bite by characterizing it in advance as a "tirade."... The most
gratuitously anti-Sid coverage was the front-page sneer from John M. Broder in
the New York Times . Broder's story began with this: "After a long career
as a scribbler in the shadows, Sidney Blumenthal got his moment in the sun
today... ." Now, it's true that Blumenthal was obviously loving the exposure,
but so are about 80 percent of the people who appear in the New York
Times . That doesn't usually get them a first-graph smirk, at least when
there are important things at stake. Imagine the respectful tone the
Times would have struck if, say, Erskine Bowles had been hauled before
the grand jury. But the First Amendment issues would have been the same....
Broder's third graph was bizarre: "A former journalist and the White House's
most celebrated conspiracy theorist, Mr. Blumenthal faced the cameras at the
peak of the Western Hemisphere's last total solar eclipse of the millennium."
Chatterbox at first thought this was an adventurous metaphor for the way
Blumenthal's story had been eclipsed by the news from Iraq, or the lull in the
Flytrap scandal, or by Broder's own attitude. But no. Turns out it was an
in-joke--Blumenthal is a millennium freak. You can laugh now... When is an
in-joke too in to run? Chatterbox's rule of thumb is that if Chatterbox doesn't
get the joke, it doesn't belong in the paper. If Chatterbox gets the joke but
the guy sitting next to Chatterbox doesn't, it's cutting-edge journalism....
Why don't reporters like Sid? Not simply because when he was a political writer
he was considered pathetically in-the-tank for Clinton (see Chatterbox for
2/23). It's also his standard demeanor, which features a permanent
I-know-a-secret-that-I'm-not-telling-you grin.... Contacted by telephone, the
Times ' Broder denies any "personal animosity toward Sid."... Yes, that's
right, Chatterbox actually picked up the phone and called somebody for a
reaction. Journalism! Don't expect it to happen again...

            
               CORPORATISM WATCH: "There is a significant difference between asking
a White House official for his sources and asking the owner of a Web page on
the Internet for his sources," Marvin Kalb, director of the Shorenstein Center
on Press and Politics at Harvard, tells the Times . "On the Drudge side,
you're in uncharted waters." Meaning what? That Drudge has different [fewer?]
First Amendment rights than Blumenthal? That Kalb knows how to get his name in
the papers?... It's true that the Sidney Blumenthal now being pursued by Starr
is the same Sidney Blumenthal who recently demanded that Matt Drudge reveal
his sources. There's some hypocrisy there on Blumenthal's part. But
there is a difference between the two situations, and it's not the offensive
Drudge-is-a-peon distinction offered by Kalb. Blumenthal was never in charge of
a grand jury criminal proceeding, the way Starr is. He is suing Drudge in civil
court for libel, the same way any citizen can sue another citizen for libel. If
Starr had similarly sued Blumenthal for libel or slander instead of calling him
before the grand jury (where, among other things, you're not entitled to have a
lawyer present during questioning), we'd have a different story on our hands.
But of course Starr would never do that because he's a "public figure" and
under existing First Amendment precedents would have the same trouble proving
his case that Blumenthal will have in his suit against Drudge...

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            The Hell of Gates, Jr.

            This week's New Yorker is light on ads (Chatterbox picked it up and
for a second thought it was the New Republic !) but thick with highbrow
Clintophilic rationalization in the form of an essay by Henry Louis Gates Jr.
You thought Flytrap was about sex and perjury? Wrong! It's really about the
decline of loyalty among former Clinton aides like George Stephanopoulos and
Leon Panetta, and the nefarious spread of atomistic individuals loyal to an
abstract, "uniform set of principles" such as "impartial truth." Kenneth Starr
is the embodiment of these inhuman principles, the "Enlightenment's...curse."
All poor Clinton was doing was trying to "struggle with the gummy, vexed
exigencies of the merely human."

            Well, Gates is right about the gummy part, for sure. Three questions,
though:

            1. Who says there's more disloyalty in this scandal? Chatterbox
carries no water for George Stephanopoulos (see 1/25 and 2/2). But his sin is
less his disloyalty in acknowledging a potential crime by his ex-patron than
his failure to confess his own complicity in that crime. Overall, the striking
thing about Flytrap is not how much disloyalty there has been but how
little . Nobody from inside the administration has yet broken ranks
(though there have been rumblings from cabinet secretaries Rubin and Riley).
There is no John Dean, no Deep Throat. Compare those Watergate betrayals with
the watered-down subversion of Stephanopoulos and Panetta, which amounted to
saying on television what was obvious--that Clinton is in trouble unless he
explains himself soon--and you would conclude that loyalty has been on the rise
since the Nixon years. (Maybe what has changed is we no longer expect a loyal
aide to admit even the obvious. We're so accustomed to spin that common sense
sounds like treason.) Gates includes a few "to-be-sure" paragraphs about Dean,
and then proceeds undeterred. Like a thinking man's Johnny Apple, he surveys
various Kennedy and Johnson hacks--even tracking down that familiar standby,
the unnamed "Washington veteran"--and reaps a harvest of self-congratulatory
harrumphing along the lines of "I come from an era when loyalty and gratitude
were regally honored," not like these young whippersnappers, etc. He cites
JFK's secretary Evelyn Lincoln as one of the ancient paragons of loyalty--the
"embodiment of the courtier's discretion." Would that be the same Evelyn
Lincoln who after JFK's death, according to 
                  Slate's David Plotz,
"circulated stories that Jackie had had adulterous trysts in the White House"
and "spent the remaining 32 years badmouthing LBJ and Jackie..."? (See Plotz's piece.)
Sounds a bit like Dick Morris defending Bill by badmouthing Hillary.

            2. Do we really want to place loyalty over truth? Gates' main straw
man is one William Godwin, who in 1793 argued that if you can rescue either
your mother or Archbishop Fenelon from a burning house, "you go for the
Archbishop, since he has the greater social contribution to make." [Gates'
words.] In Gates' essay, those who would favor a stand of principle over the
ties of blut and boden (or even business)--whistle-blowers,
antiwar dissenters, anyone who says "I often place my duty to society above my
duty to my company"--are characterized as "William Godwin types all, letting
their own dear mothers burn to a crisp with nary a second thought while they
grandly escort some silk-bedizened cleric to safety." Worse, they're selfish,
rootless cosmopolitans--sorry, they're selfish "moral illuminati" pursuing
their own vision of individual "authenticity," of "unbridled self-assertion,"
at the expense of family and group ties ("the intricately reciprocal character
of a life lived within community"). Of course, Gates comically stacks the deck
with the Godwin example, since Godwin asks that we rescue the cleric, not in
the name of truth but in the name of some sort of obnoxious aristocratic
utilitarianism. (Nor is betraying Clinton exactly like burning your
mother.) In reality, of course, it is Clinton's defenders who are making the
utilitarian arguments about the overbalancing value of the president's "greater
social contribution." A larger point concerns the value of loyalty--whether to
family, "community," employer, or other social group. Is it really such a great
thing? Loyalty, in this sense, has given us wars, racism, tribalism and
genocide. Selfish uniform principles have given us science, human rights, and
the Constitution....The Enlightenment! Individualism! Take it away, Leon
Wieseltier!...

            3. Even if Stephanopoulos should be loyal to Clinton , why should the
rest of us? By the end of his piece, Gates has subtly slipped from
attacking ex-aides who criticize Clinton to attacking anyone who
criticizes Clinton. We must all, he says, start "learning to talk about right
and wrong without recourse to abstract principles." Anyone else is a
mama-barbecuing, Ken Starr-style fanatic. Gates never explains why Chatterbox,
or any other ordinary voter, owes Clinton the same loyalty as Stephanopoulos
does. If the charges against the president are true, isn't it he who has
betrayed us?

            Chatterbox could go on and on. Didn't Bill Clinton champion the very "new
economy" of rootless, skilled free-agents--the very disloyal types Gates claims
threaten to subject the president to the laws that apply to other Americans?
Would we have been better served in Vietnam if fewer officials had quit the
Johnson administration to protest the war--or if more had quit, earlier, and
more loudly? Why should we spend valuable time reading the journalism of Henry
Louis Gates Jr. if he is happy to place his loyalty--to his family? his race?
his colleagues? to The New Yorker? , to the academic empire he's building
at Harvard?--over an annoying abstract principle like truth? Maybe Chatterbox
has seen On the Waterfront too many times. But should we really root for
the guys who poison Marlon Brando's pigeons?

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            "I'd 'I Do' Dodi": Di

            Who said loyalty is dead? Trevor Rees-Jones, the bodyguard who is the only
survivor of the car crash that killed Princess Diana, reportedly has been
recovering his memory of the fateful night. Rees Jones now says he heard a
female voice cry out for Dodi Fayed. He remembers seeing a white hatchback,
similar to the mysterious Fiat Uno thought to have collided with Diana's car,
giving chase to Diana's party. Finally he remembers that the driver of Diana's
Mercedes, Henri Paul, seemed sober, even though blood tests showed he had three
times the legal limit of alcohol in his blood.

            No one is more pleased than Chatterbox at Rees-Jones's mending memory. Well,
no one except possibly Dodi's father (and Rees-Jones' employer),
department-store tycoon Mohamed Fayed, who paid the psychiatrist who has
supervised Rees-Jones' recovery. Besides feeding Fayed's general feeling (not
entirely unjustified) that the British establishment is out to get him,
Rees-Jones' memories might lessen the liability of the Fayed-owned Ritz hotel,
which provided the inebriated driver.

            Using mystical far-Eastern techniques, an antique Tesla coil, and a regimen
of multivitamins, Chatterbox has extracted future recovered Rees-Jones memories
and provides them exclusively to readers of this column:

            "Yes, yes, it's coming back to me now,...a white Fiat Uno driven by a
papparazzi! And he's yelling...what?...oh, yes, he's yelling 'we're out to get
you! Up with Labour!'...And I hear a woman's voice--yes, it's Diana. She's
saying 'Dodi, I love you. And also your wonderful father. I so wish they'd give
him citizenship!...All that silly talk about [garbled]...it's so unfair...I'm
dying ...Tell everyone to shop at Harrod's!'"

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Dish of Currie!

            Chatterbox hears that the lawyer for Clinton secretary Betty Currie was
irritated that President Clinton overplayed Currie's initial denial of the Feb.
6 New York Times story regarding her testimony before Kenneth Starr's
grand jury....If you recall, Lawrence Wechsler, Currie's attorney, issued a
statement saying she was not "aware" of any legal or ethical impropriety.
Apparently the idea (see Chatterbox for 2/18) was to leave open the possibility
that others might interpret the facts, as Currie told them, to involve an
impropriety. Clinton immediately seized on the statement and declared to the
press that he was "pleased that Ms. Currie's lawyers stated
unambiguously--unambiguously--that she's not aware of any unethical
conduct."... Since Clinton also used the "aware" fuzzword, it's not clear what
Wechsler found so irritating. Perhaps he was more annoyed at White House
spinners, who turned Currie's statements into a denial that she' d been in any
way coached....But, hey, if Wechsler is irritated, Chatterbox is
irritated....

            
               The big question in Washington at this point in time: Did Clinton use
Jesse Jackson to "get to" Currie and convince her not to contradict the
president in her testimony?... Jackson was the one who contacted Currie when
panicked White House officials couldn't locate her early in the scandal. (She
wasn't at work because she was testifying to Starr!) Today's Washington
Post says Jackson "has provided spiritual counseling to Currie...in recent
weeks." Last Friday's New York Times reported that Jackson "seemed
uncomfortable when asked about his relationship with Mrs. Currie"....But
Jackson is also quoted in the Post as doubting that Currie would have
acted on her own volition when she asked Vernon Jordan to get Monica Lewinsky a
job. That tends to undermine Clinton's case... Is Jackson actually planning
Sister Souljah's revenge?...

            
               All the heat on Currie makes Chatterbox think: Was the sprawling,
seemingly loony essay by Henry Louis "Skip the Truth" Gates Jr. in last week's
New Yorker (see Chatterbox for 3/3) actually a far more
narrowly-targeted appeal than Chatterbox thought--specifically, an appeal for
Currie to lie for Clinton, much as Rose Mary Woods (the heroine of Gates'
essay) is thought to have lied for Nixon?... Sorry, Skip! Chatterbox's sources
(like everybody else's) say that nobody who knows Currie thinks she'll lie for
the president. Clinton spinners have also portrayed Currie as incorruptible.
They may, to their regret, be right...

            
               Chatterbox has also learned that Currie once told friends President
Clinton and his wife lead such separated lives that the president only learned
Hillary was testifying before Starr's grand jury when he saw it on TV!...

            
               Oedipuss at the Excelsior! To gain new insight into the Paula Jones
lawsuit, go buy a copy of David Maraniss' acclaimed Clinton bio First in His
Class . Turn to the second photograph, a weathered old portrait of Paula
Jones.... Wait a minute, that's not Paula Jones. That's a photo of Bill
Clinton's mother, Virginia Kelley!... The similarity is giving Chatterbox the
Freudian heebie-jeebies, for the second time this month. (The first was that
business about attorney William Ginsburg kissing the inside of baby Monica's
thighs.)... Those who say Jones is too unattractive to draw Clinton' s
attention--the Oscar Wilde defense--should be forced to ponder the implications
of this photo...

            
               Least Plausible Perjury Payoff Dept.: The Washington Post
noted ominously that shortly before Arkansas ex-judge Beth Coulson gave a
deposition denying a sexual relationship with Clinton, the president "named her
to a committee of Arkansas friends to come up with name recommendations for his
new dog." ... Hey, honey, there's that and more in it for you if you keep
quiet!... Personally, Chatterbox would have held out for ambassador to
Switzerland....

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            The Curse of the Opel

            Chatterbox is glad the UAW workers at General Motors' Saturn plant in Spring
Hill, Tennessee voted to retain their innovative labor contract, with its
stress on teamwork over bureaucratic work rules. But Saturn workers have every
right to be angry. They took a risk, moved to Tennessee, and managed to build
about the only small car made by Detroit's Big Three that matches the Japanese
in reliability--in the 1997 Consumer Reports ratings it's right up there
with the Honda Civic. So what reward do the Saturn workers get? The other
divisions of General Motors gang up to deny Saturn the capital it needs to add
a midsize sedan or a sport-utility vehicle to its line. There is also the
sneaking suspicion that UAW workers at plants covered by the old-style UAW work
rules aren't exactly happy to be shown up by their brethren in Tennessee. When
Saturn finally got permission to sell a midsize car, GM decreed that it would
be built, not in Spring Hill, but at an ancient GM factory in Wilmington
Delaware, which will not be covered by the Saturn labor agreement.

            All these insults have been covered in the press. What hasn't been
emphasized enough--the blow that will probably seal Saturn's fate for good--is
the precise nature of the car that will be assembled in Wilmington: It's a
reworked version of the Vectra sedan made by GM's German subsidiary, Opel. To
say that the record of Opel-designed cars on American highways has been
disappointing would be an understatement. For example, the current Saab
900--designed after GM bought a chunk of the Swedish automaker--is also based
on an Opel Vectra chassis. In the 1997 Consumer Reports reliability
charts, the 900 ranks a distant last in reliability out of 31 midsize cars
listed, with a rating of 60 percent worse than average. (The next worst car,
the Dodge Stratus, is only 40 percent worse than average.) GM's expensive
Cadillac Catera is also a reworked Opel design, and it too is proving
unreliable, according to Automobile magazine. The magazine reports that
"while climbing a two-mile-long grade in second gear at about 4500 rpm, the
smell of burning oil wafted into the car. When we pulled over, a small bluish
cloud enveloped the engine bay." After this and other experiences
Automobile said it had "no choice but to question [the Catera's]
reliability." Chatterbox will be very surprised if GM's attempt to pass off yet
another warmed-over Opel as a reliable, Spring Hill-style Saturn is anything
other than a disaster that kills off the Saturn name for good. Maybe that's the
whole plan...

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Poster Boys

            David "I Made Paula Jones Famous" Brock, who wants everyone to know that he
deeply regrets single-handedly bringing down the president, isn't the only
journalist to have reported the allegations of Arkansas state troopers who
claim to have procured women for then-Gov. Clinton. In addition to the Los
Angeles Times , the American Spectator in April, 1994, printed a
long, well-documented piece by Daniel Wattenberg recounting the tale of Trooper
L.D. Brown, who claims to have solicited "over a hundred" women for Clinton.
Does Wattenberg, who quit the Spectator that same year, still stand by
his story? "Yes, I do," he says.

            In a phone interview Thursday night, Brock was not as oily as Chatterbox had
hoped he'd be. But he was quite disingenuous on the subject of whether he still
believes the troopers' essential allegations. In his well-hyped Esquire
"apology"--the most recent one, not last year's I-was-a-hatchet-man number in
which he defended his Troopergate reporting--Brock merely says he's had
"occassional pangs of doubt" about the trooper story. Not exactly a
recantation. What reporter doesn't have occasional pangs of doubt about
controversial pieces? Pressed on this point, Brock paused, then paused some
more, then would only say, "There may well be some truth in what [the troopers]
say. I don't know. I'm not ruling it out. I'm not standing by it." At least
that is his position on the record. You get the sense that he doesn't want to
say anything that might annoy his new White House friends. ... If he thought
the gist of the troopers' story was false, of course, he could just declare
that he thought it was false. ... Asked if he still defends his earlier,
anti-Anita Hill sexological snooping, Brock unenthusiastically says "Yeah."
...

            
               Stand-Up Backstabbing: Paul Begala is emerging as Mr. Loyalty in the
Flytrap scandal. Is that the same Paul Begala who leaked nasty little tidbits
about fellow Clintonians to Bob Woodward for use in the latter's 1994 book,
The Agenda ? Like the detail that in a meeting with Begala, Deputy Budget
Director Alice Rivlin was eating a chicken salad sandwich, which was "dripping
from her chin"? That's loyalty! ... Begala also called his colleague,
then-Budget Director Leon Panetta, "The Poster Boy for Economic Constipation."
... Of course, in the great 1993 debate between Begala's don't
-tax-the-middle-class "populists" and Rivlin and Panetta's Wall-Street-pleasing
budget-balancers, Rivlin and Panetta have been proven right and Begala proven
wrong ...

            
               The Sabato Scorecard: In the early stages of Flytrap, University of
Virginia media critic Larry "Feeding Frenzy" Sabato was all over the tube,
promoting his view that 40 percent of all that facts that come out in the early
stages of a scandal will always turn out to be wrong. Call it Sabato's Law.
Chatterbox would like to pose a contrary hypothesis: in Flytrap, virtually all
the stories that get criticized as the false products of a Sabatovian "feeding
frenzy" will turn out to be essentially true. Here are four of them:

            --Did Clinton give Monica a dress?

            --Did Clinton seemingly coach Betty Currie with leading questions, as
reported in the New York Times ?

            --Did steward Bayani Nelvis see Clinton and Monica alone in the study near
the Oval Ofice, as reported in the Wall Street Journal ?

            --Did a Secret Service agent see Clinton and Monica in a "compromising
situation," as the Dallas Morning News initially reported? In an
"ambiguous situation," as the paper's second, watered-down version had it?

            Keep score at home! Add new stories to the list as they come out and get
knocked down with carefully worded denials by Clinton-affiliated lawyers (as
was the so-far perfectly accurate New York Times story on Currie--see
Chatterbox for 2/18). Remember that to win, Sabato has to get four out of 10!
... Or maybe his own pontifications were part of that inaccurate 40 percent.
(The same way all those ordinary voters who are telling pollsters they think
it's OK to lie may be lying to the pollsters about what they think!) ... Of
course, even if all the "feeding frenzy" stories turn out to be true, by the
time they are proven true the public may already have come to the unshakable
conclusion that they're suspect, or the public may be so accustomed to the
scandal that it doesn't care. This is the genius behind the "knock it down
today, forget about tomorrow" Clinton strategy. ...

            
               DOX KNOX BROX CROX! Chatterbox would love to dismiss the idea that a
president's function is to be a "role model," as opposed to simply an effective
president. Alas, the evidence keeps coming in that the "role model" effect is
real. The latest? This week's study in the Journal of the American Medical
Association confirming that mastectomies increased after Nancy Reagan chose
to undergo that radical procedure rather than have a less drastic "lumpectomy."
Indeed, lumpectomies dropped 25 percent. The conclusion: "medical care can be
influenced substantially by the behavior of celebrity role models." And sexual
behavior can be influenced substantially by ...

            Which brings us to the CHATTERBOX LEXIS-NEXIS FIND OF THE DAY:
            

            "Let me say that there is a lot of talk about personal responsibility. What
we have to do is practice it. There's a lot of talk about valuing family and
work and community. What we have to do is value them."

            --President Clinton, remarks before the 25th anniversary dinner of the
Congressional Black Caucus, Sept. 23, 1995

            Chatterbox is already feeling occasional pangs of doubt about all of the
above items! ...

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Secret Gore Strategy Revealed!

            Vice President Al Gore is doing his part to protect President Clinton from
impeachment. The new Gore strategy apparently calls for Gore to be as annoying
as possible, thereby reminding congressional decisionmakers of the potential
cost of removing Clinton from office. Gore initiated his campaign last week,
when he announced plans to spend $20 to $50 million in taxpayers' money to
implement a midnight brainstorm of his: Putting a continuous, live image of
planet Earth, as seen from space, on the Internet! NASA chief Daniel Goldin has
been dragooned into supporting Gore's goo-goo caprice. As John Pike, director
of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists, told
Elizabeth Shogren of the Los Angeles Times : "The Earth is big and the
weather is slow, so it's not like there is perceptible motion. It is about as
exciting as watching the grass grow." Sort of like watching the vice president
himself! ... Gore continued his scare campaign by phoning Washington
Post Executive Editor Len Downie to complain that a photo the Post
had run of the big-blue-marble Earth was upside down! Only after Gore hung up
did Downie realize that there is no "right side up" or "upside down" when you
are looking at a sphere from outer space ... Gore's campaign appears to be
highly effective, as Clinton's approval ratings have kept rising despite new
and dramatic sex charges. ... Chatterbox, calling on its extensive network of
insider contacts, has learned details of future components of the still-secret
GoreBore initiative, which will include: A national campaign to convert
football fields to the metric system; a Global Engineering Olympics to be
televised during halftime of the NCAA championship basketball game; a gigantic
Temple of Science to be built on the Mall in Washington, featuring animatronic
demographers discussing overpopulation; and a proposal to have "students of the
world ... gather and study environmental information on a daily basis and
communicate that data to the world through television." ... And everyone will
wear their underwear on the outside, so we can check! .... Actually, that last
bit about having students gather daily environmental information isn't phony.
It's genuine Gorebore ...

            
               QUID PRO QUO? 
               60 Minutes sure pulled out all the stops on
Sunday to make Kathleen Willey look good. The black-and-white photograph of
Nathan Landow, the developer who allegedly pressured Willey to keep quiet, made
him look like a vicious psychopath. The photo of Julie Steele, who says Willey
told her to lie, made her look as if she'd just tried out a vacuum cleaner on
her abundant graying hair. ... All this may be part of the implicit deal 60
Minutes strikes with an important source like Willey. But viewers should be
warned. ... Chatterbox knows how this game is played, mister! ... CBS's Ed
Bradley conducted a similarly kid-gloved interview with Anita Hill during the
Clarence Thomas mess ... Bradley's worst sin last Sunday? He brought out that
Willey knew Clinton had the hots for her from an earlier incident when
then-candidate Clinton had asked her to bring some chicken soup to his room.
But then Bradley neglected to ask the obvious question: since Willey was aware
of Clinton's interest, wasn't she hoping to use her sexual attraction to help
her get the paying White House job she desperately needed? Willey might easily
have answered the question--she might have even said, "Yes, but I didn't expect
him to jump me right there in the Oval Office"--without undermining her story.
But it would have been nice if Bradley had asked ...

            
               INTO THE VOID: If Bradley almost flunked Journalism 101, Paula Jones'
lawyers definitely flunked PR 101. What possessed them to release their
700-page trove of anti-Clinton documents on a Friday? Doesn't every sentient
American know by now that Friday is when you release news you want to
bury , because Friday news gets reported in the little-read Saturday
papers? ... When Chatterbox reveals what it did in the '60s, you can bet it
will be on a Friday! ...

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Fondlee, Kathleen: Isikoff on the Stand?

            A potentially significant conflict is opening up between Michael Isikoff,
the Newsweek reporter who's been a driving force in the Flytrap scandal,
and Julie Steele, the erstwhile friend of Kathleen Willey who says Willey told
her to lie to Isikoff. As discussed in Chatterboxes for 2/3 and 2/18, Isikoff
reported as long ago as last August that Steele initially told him (Version #1)
that Willey had told her about an unwanted Clinton pass on the day it happened.
Isikoff also reported, in the same August story, that Steele then recanted, and
told him (Version #2) that Willey had only "told her about the incident weeks
after it happened, saying only that the president had made a pass at her." Now
Steele claims that Willey didn't mention anything at all about a pass, wanted
or not--Steele has signed an affidavit (Version #3) claiming that Willey "never
said anything to suggest that President Clinton made sexual advances toward
her." What's more--and this is the key point--Steele, through her lawyer
denies telling Isikoff what he reported she told him last summer after
her recantation, namely that Willey had still talked of a "pass," if not an
unwanted pass.

            This is a direct conflict; the question isn't what Willey told Steele but
what Steele told Isikoff. Isikoff says Steele told him Willey talked of a
"pass." Steele denies telling Isikoff this. (In effect, she says there was no
Version #2) ... But there's more: Isikoff also reported, in the March 9 issue
of Newsweek , that Steele had told him a second time that Willey had
indeed mentioned a sexual advance. He wrote: "Just two weeks ago, however,
Steele repeated to Newsweek that Willey had told her about a sexual
'overture' by Clinton." Does Steele deny telling Isikoff this as well?
Presumably yes. (Her lawyer, Nancy Luque, said she would try to reach her
client and call Chatterbox back. Chatterbox is still waiting.) ...

            Unless Willey's credibility is somehow destroyed, this isn't a petty side
dispute. It bears directly on Steele's credibility--has she changed her story
to exculpate Clinton?--and Steele is currently the main witness undermining
Kathleen Willey. Whom to believe? Isikoff is standing by his story. "We have no
intention of printing any retraction," he says. Chatterbox doesn't know Julie
Steele; it does know Isikoff. Chatterbox's money is on him. This doesn't sound
like something he'd make a mistake about, and he wouldn't print an untruth. ...
Could it be a case of confusion and miscommunication? A lot depends on the
specifics of just how Isikoff grilled Steele, which he presumably did. Which
brings us to ...

            
               A second issue: If Willey remains important, it's hard to see why
Kenneth Starr shouldn't try to get Isikoff's testimony regarding what Steele
told him. But will Isikoff testify if subpoenaed? ... Chatterbox's unsolicited
advice: Spill your guts out, Mike! It's not as if you'll be protecting the
identity of a confidential source. Reporters, like other citizens, have an
obligation to testify. The alternative view, that reporters have a special role
and special rights, is snooty corporatism! (See Chatterbox 2/26) ... But
probably Isikoff will resist ...

            
               A third issue: why doesn't the press report Steele's purported change
of story? If you read Time you have no idea that there was an issue
regarding Steele's Version #2. ( Time just reports that Steele says
"Willey didn't describe it as sexual.") Maybe Time doesn't want to get
into a pissing match with a rival Newsweek reporter. (Oh, go ahead!).
But what's the New York Times ' excuse? Times reporter John
Broder's front page story on the Steele recantation manages to run about 24
inches, not counting a reprint of the Steele affidavit, without mentioning this
significant factual dispute .... That's the second time Broder has embarrassed
himself in three weeks. (The first? His sophomoric sneering at Sidney
Blumenthal. See Chatterbox 3/1) ...

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            Chatterbox Goes Right!

            Deborah Mathis of Gannett caused a stir in Republican circles with her
report last Wednesday that presidential aspirant Sen. John Ashcroft of Missouri
had all but locked up the oh-so-coveted political consulting services of former
Christian Coalition leader Ralph Reed. Mathis notes that "Every chance he gets,
it seems, Reed praises and promotes" Ashcroft. She adds: "If and when John
Ashcroft decides to make his presidential ambitions official ... Reed will
disappear from the market." Wrong! says Chatterbox, in its best John
McLaughlin voice. Think about it for a moment. Who benefits if Ashcroft gets in
the race and splits the social conservative primary vote with Steve Forbes?
Answer: Forbes' biggest potential rival, and Reed's other potential client,
Texas governor George W. Bush, Jr., that's who. An Ashcroft entry might also
kill the candidacy of Beltway conservative Gary Bauer, thereby freeing up the
allegiances of the followers of Bauer's ally, radio moralist Dr. James Dobson.
... Reed is with Bush all the way. Trust Chatterbox on this one. ...

            
               Dept. of Faux-Groveling: Chatterbox (3/19) shouldn't have been as
nasty as it was about John Broder's front page New York Times story last
Thursday on Kathleen Willey's detractor, Julie Steele. Chatterbox should have
been nastier! Not only did Broder forget to mention Newsweek
reporter Michael Isikoff's contention that Steele had changed her story at
least two times, but Broder also forgot to mention that--as Isikoff had
reported a week and a half earlier--Steele had taken $7,000 from the
National Enquirer after shifting to an anti-Willey posture. ... Not that
Steele is lying. Not that she isn't. But given the volume of detail the
Times provided on Kathleen Willey's past, including her attempts to sell
her story, you'd think Broder would at least mention the main questions
surrounding Steele ... Now it turns out, as Newsweek reports this week,
that Steele also met with an editor for the tabloid Star, who claims Steele was
asking $20,000. ...

            
               
                  Time vs. Isikoff, cont.: As predicted in Chatterbox for 2/23,
Time magazine is heavily wedded to Steele's credibility. Newsweek
is wedded (slightly less heavily) to Willey's. Time readers still
don't know about the Steele-Isikoff dispute, or Steele's tabloid dealings,
though they know all about Willey's aborted tab and book deals. ... Time
also somewhat sleazily ends its anti-Willey piece by noting that a grant of
immunity "may help protect [Willey] from prosecution in connection with any
financial or tax improrieties," without ever saying what those improprieties
might be. ...

            
               No, Jim, We Think This One Might be a Dealbreaker:
            

            "People have tried to suggest they are former friends, but when the dust
settles I think they'll be okay."

            --Jim Moody, lawyer for Linda Tripp, referring to the friendship between his
client and Monica Lewinsky, whom Tripp secretly taped and exposed to a
potential perjury prosecution.

         
      
   
   
   
      
         
            You Don't Know Jackboots!

            Chatterbox yields to no content-provider when it comes to condemning special
prosecutor Kenneth Starr's excesses--in particular, Starr's attempt to
criminalize criticism by calling Clinton aide Sidney Blumenthal into the grand
jury room. But the reaction to Starr's subpoena of the records of Monica
Lewinsky's purchases at a Washington, D.C. bookstore has been mindlessly
critical. Former Democratic Congresswoman Pat Schroeder immediately called the
subpoena "repugnant to the Bill of Rights" and "a scenario that belongs in
Baghdad." The ACLU harrumphed about "the right to buy books without government
scrutiny," while the director of the Americans for Democratic Action drew a
comparison to "some of the worst abuses under a totalitarian regime." Nicholson
Baker, whose phone-sex novel Vox Monica allegedly bought, went for a
cute, somewhat forced sound bite by saying that "Starr should get down on his
kneepads and beg the country's pardon for undermining the Constitution in this
way." Monica's lawyer William Ginsburg charged ... well, you can imagine what
William Ginsburg charged.

            Everyone should calm down. Can't books be evidence? If someone bludgeons
Chatterbox to death with a copy of David Halberstam's The Children ,
Chatterbox hopes prosecutors will be able to check whether any of its enemies
previously purchased that worthy tome. If someone blows up the United Nations,
it's worth knowing if the prime suspect bought The Anarchist's Cookbook
or Michael Reagan's book on the "New World Order." And, to pick another
hypothetical example, if Monica Lewinsky has told Linda Tripp's tape recorder
that she, Monica, had phone sex with the president on December 3 after buying a
copy of Vox , isn't Starr permitted to try to support the accuracy of
those taped recollections by finding out if Lewinsky actually bought the book
around that date? Were Starr trying to punish Lewinsky for her thoughts or
tastes or reading habits or speech--the way he was threatening to punish
Blumenthal--all the Nazis-are-coming hysteria might be justified. But there's
no evidence that's what Starr's up to, nor is it a likely scenario. ...

            
               STUPID CLINTON DEFENSE #2: Meanwhile, the self-humiliation of New
York Times columnist Anthony Lewis in the service of the president
continues apace. Lewis has been a reliable First Amendment defender, but his
last column suggested that judges should hold journalists in contempt (and even
throw them in jail)if they keep publishing "stories without attribution based
on gossip, speculation and innuendo." Here is an idea that really is "repugnant
to the Bill of Rights." ... Lewis proposes his censorship in order to prevent
sheep-like juries and judges from being swayed by publicity. The jury he's
thinking about is the Paula Jones civil suit jury. His opening example of
irresponsible press activity is the "overwhelming television and print
coverage" of Kathleen Willey's allegations. Lewis can't really be proposing to
suppress the "60 Minutes" Willey interview--which was, in truth, not a story
based on "gossip" or "innuendo" but first-person testimony about the behavior
of the president in the Oval Office, about which the voters are surely entitled
to form an opinion--in order to protect a puny civil suit for money damages? By
the end of Lewis' column you realize that yes, that's exactly what he means.
... By sacrificing the ideal of informed political debate in the name of the
"administration of justice," Lewis is at least hewing to his prior reputation
as a pathetic court-worshipper. But a few weeks ago Lewis more or less argued
it didn't matter if Clinton lied under oath in a court case. Chatterbox wonders
what this "don't-worry-about-perjury" principle would do for the
"administration of justice." ...

            
               Paranoid's Corner: If Clinton really wanted to escape Flytrap for
good, here's what he'd do: Have a fresh, previously unknown woman come forward
alleging unwanted sexual advances along Jones/Willey lines. Let her story get
big play in the press. Let her have a packed, nationally-televised news
conference. Then have her confess that it was all a lie, that she was in fact a
tool of the Vast Right-Wing Conspiracy! ... Her example would not only
retrospectively discredit Jones and Willey, it would protect Clinton by
prospectively discrediting any women who might come forward in the future. But
the Clintonites would never try this. ... Wait. ... Excuse Chatterbox for a
second ... What's that on the Drudge Report? ... Some woman named Zercher
...

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Chatterbox Goes Too Far!

            One reason Kathleen Willey's tale of groping and fondling in the Oval Office
seems credible is this: if she were making up a story, she could have made up a
much better one. For example, Willey told Ed Bradley of 60 Minutes that
when Clinton made his pass, she remembers saying to him, "Aren't you afraid
that somebody's going to walk in here?" Not exactly the strongest or most
plaintive objection she might have lodged. The pass itself could easily have
been made cruder, and Willey could have alleged it was repeated--if she'd been
in a fabricating, sympathy-generating mode. Thanks to Time magazine, we
have evidence that when Willey wants to make up a story, she knows how
to pull out all the emotional stops. Time says that in 1995 when Willey
decided to get back at a former lover, Shaun Docking, she told him she was
pregnant. But not just pregnant, pregnant with his twins! Then she told him she
would have an abortion. Then on the morning the abortion was supposed to
happen, she had her then-friend, Julie Steele, tell him she'd called it off.
Then she had her friend tell him she'd had a miscarriage! Could any hack
screenwriter have milked that scenario for more drama? Contrast that with the
banality of Willey's Clinton story. So, in a perverse way, Time's tale
of Willey's pregnancy lie actually tends to support her veracity when it comes
to Clinton. ... Okay, maybe that's going a bit too far. But you get the point
...

            
               Save Clinton First! Some pretty good evidence that Flytrap has
seriously distracted the president: columnist Robert Novak reports that at the
Gridiron Dinner on March 21, he sat next to Clinton and asked the president
about Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's Social Security reform proposal, which
Moynihan had unveiled a week earlier. (See Jodie Allen's analysis.) For any president
interested in, say, a second term legacy, Moynihan's plan was a reasonably big
deal. Social Security's solvency is one of the two or three major domestic
issues facing Clinton, and "saving" the system was a central theme of his
recent State of the Union address. While Moynihan hasn't been a Clinton
loyalist and his social policy proposals (e.g. on welfare) don't always fly, he
speaks with some authority as ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee.
His plan was also considered radical, coming from a Social Security defender,
because it suggested using part of Social Security's payroll tax to fund
"voluntary personal savings accounts" that would supplement regular Social
Security benefits. (Indeed, Moynihan was almost immediately blasted from the
left.). Yet, according to Novak, on March 21 Clinton "did not seem familiar
with Moynihan's latest plan...." Whatever else you want to say about Clinton,
he's not usually inattentive or uninterested in domestic policy. The Moynihan
Plan is something he would normally be on top of, were he not preoccupied with
other matters ...

            
               True Love: An excellent conspiratorial moment at a recent Washington,
D.C., party given for Salon magazine. Present were: presidential aide
Sidney Blumenthal, newscaster Jim Lehrer, columnist Molly Ivins, journalist
Christopher Hitchens, stunt man David Brock, and Murray Waas, the oddball
investigative reporter who has been chronicling the machinations of the Vast
Right Wing Conspiracy for Salon and the New York Observer . At one
point, Waas, looking around the room as if to make sure noone was following
him, snuck out the rear door into the unlit back yard. A few seconds later,
Blumenthal slipped out the same back door to join Waas. They could then be seen
having a brief, but intense, tete-a-tete in the darkness. ...

            
               Bonus Automotive Item: The complaints by British car enthusiasts
about the purchase of Rolls-Royce by BMW remind Chatterbox of the previous
acquisition by BMW of Rover, another prestigious British marque whose cars had
achieved an unfortunate reputation for less-than-bulletproof reliability. One
old-guard Rover executive complained to journalist Jeremy Clarkson that BMW's
quality control policies were "stupid. They just won't tolerate any mistakes at
all." ...

         
   
   
      
         
            Good News Hunting!

            "ADMISSIONS PLUNGE AT U. OF CALIFORNIA FOR 3 MINORITIES." That was the
headline over the lead story in the April 1 edition of the New York
Times . A similarly disturbing message ("Acceptance of Blacks, Latinos to UC
Plunges") topped the Los Angeles Times . The figures did seem grim. At
UC's Berkeley campus, according to the NYT , the share of the three
"underrepresented minorities"--blacks, Hispanics, and American Indians--fell
from 23.1 percent of admitted freshman to 10.4 percent. Black admissions
dropped 57 percent. At U.CL.A., the NYT told us, the three minorities'
share fell from 19.8 percent to 12.7 percent, with blacks down 43 percent. The
fears of opponents of Proposition 209, which eliminated racial preferences in
California's public institutions, seemed to be coming true--despite the efforts
of UC officials to compensate for the end of race preferences by giving an edge
to students who have overcome economic hardships. "This shows that economics
will not substitute for race," said Theodore M. Shaw, the director-counsel of
the NAACP Legal Defense Fund.

            But those were only the figures for two individual UC campuses; the
university has eight campuses in all. Students who don't get into one campus
sometimes get into another one. And today, two days after the release of the
UCLA and Berkeley numbers, the university president's office released the
figures for the entire UC system. The news wasn't nearly as grim. The total for
the three minorities fell, but only from 17.6 percent to 15.4 percent. The
Hispanic share of admissions fell, but only from 13.2 to 11.9 percent. The
black share of admissions fell, but only from 3.5 percent to 2.8 percent--a
loss of about 250 African-American students over all eight campuses. Even that
number may be misleading, since it doesn't include blacks who chose not to
check the optional box declaring their race. Indeed, the large increase in the
number of students declining to give their ethnic origin was one of the more
striking, and heartening, phenomena in the UC admissions stats (and one the
NYT ignored in its April 1 story). University officials seem to believe
that these "decline to state" students are overwhelmingly whites and Asians,
but nobody knows for sure.

            The point isn't that Tuesday's set of numbers was wrong and Thursday's was
right. Presumably they're both right: Black and Latino admissions fell most at
the most selective campuses. And if blacks are now more concentrated at UC's
less desirable Riverside campus (or its famously gorgeous Santa Cruz facility),
that's news in itself. But there was no "plunge" in the overall UC figures, as
the April 1 headlines erroneously imply. ...

            And why couldn't both sets of figures have been released on the same day?
Why release the "bad news" first, then let the "good" news out two days later
when it is sure to be buried under the wall-to-wall Paula-Jones-dismissal
coverage? Call Chatterbox paranoid--you won't be the first!--but could it be
that pro-preference university officials want to discredit Prop. 209 by
painting its consequences as more dire than they actually are? ... Terry
Lightfoot, a spokeman for the UC president's office, denies any "motive to tell
a bad story." He says the release of admissions data has always been left up to
the individual campuses, and it simply took a couple of days to calculate the
overall university-wide figures once the UCLA and Berkeley numbers became
available. ... Hmmmm. Almost convincing. ...

            For the record, Chatterbox voted for Prop. 209. Even if the number of
minorities at UC were cut by a factor of three, Chatterbox thinks 209 would be
a good bargain, because those who are admitted won't have to worry why. If the
decrease is only from 17 to 15 percent, it's a very good deal. ... Take it
away, Stephan Thernstrom! ...

         
      
   
   
      
         
            Brox Crox Redux!

            Turns out David Brock's recent Esquire confessional didn't quite
confess to everything. In Esquire , Brock writes that "a major
contributor to Newt Gingrich's GOPAC" introduced him to the "gothic world of
anti-Clintonism." Why would Brock, in his tell-all, decline to name this "major
contributor?" Now we know. Lynn Sweet of the Chicago Sun-Times reported
this week that the "contributor," a Chicago investment banker named Peter
Smith, did more than introduce Brock to the anti-Clinton world. He paid
Brock $5,000 for "research expenses." ... What's wrong with a reporter taking
money like that? Nothing, at least in Chatterbox's book. Brock apparently
wasn't a full-time employee of the American Spectator at the time. So
someone who wants a story written paid him to research the story. When the Ford
Foundation does the same thing, they call it a prestigious fellowship! ... But
if Brock thought it was OK to take the money, why did he seemingly hide
that fact in Esquire ? And why did it apparently take Smith showing the
cancelled $5,000 check to Sweet to get Brock to fess up? In the New York
Post , Brock is quoted as saying "I didn't immediately remember, but I never
denied it. ... I said if [Smith] has the documentation, I'd be happy to confirm
it." Do you believe Brock didn't remember getting $5,000 from a secretive
anti-Clinton operative? Private citizens don't run around offering that kind of
money to freelance journalists every day, at least that has (unfortunately)
been Chatterbox's experience. It's especially implausible that Brock "didn't
remember" the payment when he had just finished writing what was supposed to be
a confessional article detailing his own journalistic missteps in the service
of the Clinton-haters--an article that included criticism of "the GOPAC
moneyman" (Smith) for offering to give "legal expense" checks to the
anti-Clinton troopers. But if Brock is dissembling about his memory of the
$5,000, what else is he dissembling about? .... Brock didn't return a phone
call asking for comment. Here Chatterbox goes the extra mile to be fair, and
look what happens! ...

            
               Follow-Up on the News!: As predicted in yesterday's Chatterbox, the
relatively good news contained in the overall admissions figures for the entire
8-campus University of California system--which showed black and Hispanic
admissions dropping by only 17 and 7 percent, respectively, in the wake of
Prop. 209's rollback of race preferences--was either ignored or buried by the
press. Neither the New York Times or Washington Post carried the
story. The Los Angeles Times ran a below-the-fold piece on page A3, the
headline and lead paragraphs of which discussed the non-news that UC plans, as
it always does, to offer qualified students rejected by their chosen campuses
spots somewhere in the UC system. Only in the fourth paragraph does
education writer Kenneth Weiss note the "figures released Thursday showing that
blacks and Latinos systemwide did not fare as badly as they had at the
university's most competitive campuses." Contrast this with the front-page
treatment given two days earlier in the LAT , New York Times and
Washington Post to the bad news about the large drops in black and
Latino admissions at those two most-competitive campuses, Berkeley and UCLA.
Chatterbox's paranoid fears have been borne out! This will only encourage him.
...

            Some readers wondered why Chatterbox made such a big deal about the delayed
release of the UC systemwide figures, since the figures for each of the eight
individual UC campuses were available earlier, and indeed were printed on the
back page of the New York Times in a chart accompanying the April 1
story about the grim Berkeley and UCLA results. Couldn't any intelligent
reader--or Chatterbox--have just added up the figures from the 8 campuses to
get the systemwide total? The answer is no. If you did that, you'd double-count
a student who was accepted, say, to both UCLA and San Diego. Only when the
university itself recalculated the 8-campus figures to eliminate this
duplication were accurate systemwide results available to the press. Too bad
they didn't get reported. ...

         
      
   

   
   
      
         
            Washington's $7 Million Man

            Chatterbox was shocked upon reading Lloyd Grove's recent Washington
Post profile of James Johnson. Johnson is the former Mondale aide who runs
Fannie Mae, the "government sponsored enterprise" that buys mortgages, packages
them into large blocks and resells them as "mortgage-backed securities." What
was so shocking? Chatterbox already knew Fannie Mae was one of the last great
Washington rackets--a place where ordinary, competent, well-connected politicos
and lawyers get to earn astronomical, Gordon Gekko-like sums (Johnson made an
estimated $7.2 million in 1996) while working to preserve the government favors
that help this ostensibly private, for-profit enterprise earn $3 billion or so
a year. If somebody had to win the Fannie Mae jackpot, it might as well be
Johnson, who--Chatterbox's friends attest--is a decent man.

            No, what startled were Johnson's other jobs: in addition to running
Fannie Mae, he is also chairman of the Kennedy Center, Washington's Big Culture
box, and the Brookings Institution, Washington's leading
liberal/centrist think tank. Suddenly, this bland, bespectacled
Norwegian-American has emerged, in the words of ex-colleague Harold Ickes, as
"the chairman of the universe." OK, that may be overstatement (Ickes is also
the man who calls Kenneth Starr's judicially-supervised subpoenas "Gestapo
police state tactics"). But Johnson is Washington's equivalent of
Michael Eisner, a self-promoting power-nerd who protects his insidiously
synergistic empire by buying off potential critics with well-publicized good
works.

            Grove's profile wasn't that nasty (after its publication, Johnson sent an
appreciative don't-worry-I'm-not-mad note to Post matriarch Katharine
Graham). But the piece contained the essential anti-Johnson charge--that "he
wields his considerable clout mainly to protect and defend Fannie Mae's
congressionally mandated business advantages." What advantages? First, Fannie
Mae pays no state or local taxes, depriving the needy District of Columbia of
perhaps hundreds of millions of dollars. Second, various federal laws imply
that Fannie Mae's securities are backed by the U.S. government. This lets
Fannie Mae raise money at interest rates lower than its private competitors
must pay. The Congressional Budget Office estimates the value of these special
breaks at $4 billion a year, of which about a third goes to Fannie Mae
shareholders and executives. (See Matthew Cooper's 
                  Slate
               
analysis, which Johnson appreciatively called "unbelievable
trash.")

            If Johnson can keep Congress from ending this $4 billion perk, he's more
than earned his fantastic paycheck. Mainly, he uses traditional methods--
making campaign contributions, opening Fannie Mae offices in key districts.
There's also the Fannie Mae Foundation, which curries favor by handing out
checks to neighborhood groups. (Chatterbox himself once managed to cadge a
speaking fee arranged by this wonderful organization.) Johnson's Kennedy Center
chairmanship is another weapon in his PR arsenal. It's pathetically easy to
play on Washington's cultural pretensions--"We're a sophisticated city like New
York, aren't we? Aren't we?"--something lawyer-lobbyist Abe Fortas discovered
when he managed to distract attention from his corruption by playing classical
violin in public. By cosponsoring free Kennedy Center concerts with the
Washington Post, Fannie Mae purchases the goodwill of an insecure city
and simultaneously cozies up to a journalistic institution that could do it a
lot of damage. (Can you imagine the Post sponsoring a concert series
with a less respectable subsidy-hound like Archer Daniels Midland's Dwayne
Andreas? Chatterbox can't.)

            But it's Johnson's Brookings connection that really rankles. For decades,
Brookings has been the liberal institution you could count on to defend
government enterprises when they need to be defended, and criticize subsidies
when they're unjustified. In essence, Brookings scholars exist to expose
rackets like Fannie Mae. But now the head of Fannie Mae is the most prominent
public face of Brookings. Yesterday, Chatterbox drove by the Brookings building
and picked up the latest issue of the Brookings Review . There on page 3
is a large smiling photo of James Johnson, impeccably tailored, offering a
banal Eisner-like introduction to the issue.

            To test the chilling effect of Johnson's stewardship, and to generally make
trouble, Chatterbox called up six Brookings scholars, several of whom have been
quite courageous in the past, and asked them what they thought of Fannie Mae's
special deal. Of the six, four chickened out. Two did not. Economist Barry
Bosworth said that while Fannie Mae was a "good, hard-charging" corporation, it
should be "fully-taxed," and an "equalization tax" should be levied on its
borrowing to offset the effect of the implicit federal guarantee. Economist
Henry Aaron said "I don't see any reason why a corporation traded on the New
York Stock Exchange ... should be given advantages by state and local
governments who have to collect more in taxes from Plain Joes to compensate for
the concession." Spoken like true Brookings scholars! The Chatterbox Medal for
courage in policy analysis to you both!

            
               Memo to Jim Johnson: These Brookings wonks want to take away your $4
billion meal ticket! Obviously they fail to understand Fannie Mae's role as a
"catalyst for community development." Don't you want to squash them like bugs?
Or better yet, get back at them in some quiet, vicious Minnesota-like way?

            P.S.: Isn't your new Eisner-like profile a potential liability? Fannie Mae
has always preserved its lucrative privileges in part because it's a pretty
obscure agency. Now you present a big, juicy public target. What if some
Republican presidential candidate looking for an issue--John Kasich,
say--portrayed you, the $7 Million Man, as the embodiment of everything wrong
with Washington? Just a thought.

         
   
   
      
         
            This isn't Argument. It's Mere Refutation!

            Something has happened to the argument over Flytrap in Washington. It's
become tedious. Initially the issues were legion, the ramifications seemingly
kaleidoscopic, the players unsure of their positions. There were traitors and
apostates, Clintonite Clinton critics and conservative presidency-defenders,
and many who were simply confused and bemused. Now things have settled out,
along binary lines that are all too familiar. "Everyone lies about sex." "But
it was under oath ." "So what. " "It's a crime." No it isn't. Yes it is.
'Tis not. Etc.. Everyone's had this argument; everyone's been annoyed by not
winning this argument; nobody wants to have this argument again. Were somebody
to start it at a Washington cocktail party, the guests would scurry into the
other room as surely as if that someone had said "Let's build the bridge to the
21st century" or attempted to redebate the Vietnam War ... Of course,
Washingtonians may have chosen up sides in this fashion in part because so many
people in the capital need to choose up sides in order to do their jobs, in
part because the only thing more boring than having an opinion on Flytrap is
not having one ("Well, I think only time will tell." "Gee, I'm so glad I
invited you ...."). Outside of Washington, where people never cared that
much about Flytrap in the first place, opinions may be much less dug in, more
vaguely-formed and fluid. ... The catch is that the Washington commentariat is
tempted to conclude that Flytrap is over because it is bored with the scandal.
But in the rest of America, the scandal may simply have yet to catch on ...
Only time will tell! ...

            
               Mulholland Dive: The Washington Times reports in its April 11
edition that a Democratic party official from California, Bob Mulholland, is
gathering marital dirt on Republicans who might vote on Clinton's impeachment.
Mulholland doesn't duck the charge: "Many of the House Judiciary members are
divorced, and their divorce papers contain a lot of interesting information,
and we'll be sharing that with the American people," he tells the Times
... Fair enough. Honest blackmail! ... Well, not completely honest, since the
main charge against Clinton isn't marital infidelity, it's perjury and
obstruction of justice. ... Mulholland is good at his job. If I were a
Republican I'd worry more about him and less about Sidney Blumenthal. ... Even
Chatterbox once did a bit of business with Mulholland. What kind of business?
Let's just say that a Reagan-Republican Senate candidate in California was
known to somewhat hypocritically visit a Los Angeles newsstand that featured an
extensive selection of adult magazines. Chatterbox heard about this from a
friend, told someone else, and eventually got a call from Mulholland, who asked
for the name of the newsstand, which Chatterbox provided. Four days before the
election, with one poll showing the candidates in a virtual tie, Mulholland got
the story out by shouting questions at the Republican during a campaign
stop--accusing him of also patronizing a Sunset Boulevard strip club. He
admitted going to the club, which he called "a cocktail place." Witnesses
confirmed his newsstand habits. He did not win. Democrat Barbara Boxer, who
did, owes Chatterbox a medium-sized chit. ... Given this incident, however,
Mulholland would probably be the wrong spokesman to righteously attack Kenneth
Starr for trying to learn about Monica Lewinsky's semi-pornographic bookstore
purchases ...

            
               Note to starving freelance writers: If you've been recruited to write
op-ed opinion pieces praising Microsoft, as part of the phony Microsoft "grass
roots" PR campaign revealed in Friday's Los Angeles Times , don't
consider the rent paid just yet! Specifically, have you ever tried actually
getting a freelance writing check out of Microsoft's notorious Accounts Payable
department? Expect roughly the same effort it might take to obtain payment from
the Defense Department for a small anti-ballistic missile system. ... Don't
believe it? You might want to look up Daniel Seligman's article in the October
6, 1997 Weekly Standard on "How Microsoft Pays Its Bills"...
Chatterbox's theory: in the exciting new world of personal computing, you can
create unlimited amounts of paperwork without even the constraint of having to
buy the paper! ...Recommendation: Demand cash up front, before you write a
word! It works for Chatterbox! ...

            
               Straight to Video: Chatterbox (having been paid) was about to write
an exciting item about the Fall of the Pundettes--Laura Ingraham out at CBS!
Ann Coulter out at MSNBC! We're bored with blonde right-wing babes! Etc. But
now Chatterbox has learned that a) Ingraham will announce a big deal with NBC
tomorrow; and b) practically all of MSNBC's "contributors," not just Coulter,
are kaput. ... Never mind. ...

            
               Why Fannie May Fear the Post: Thursday's fair and balanced assessment
of Fannie Mae's James Johnson mentioned that the Fannie Mae Foundation and the
Washington Post cosponsor a series of free concerts at the Kennedy
Center (which Johnson also heads). The concerts, which began in 1997, are one
way for Johnson to get friendly with a major journalistic institution that
might write nasty things about Fannie Mae. But Chatterbox's boss rightly points
out that the Post has, in fact, written nasty things about Fannie Mae.
In January, 1995, before the Post -Fannie Mae cultural freebies began,
the Post gave prominent play to a tough two-part series by David Vise,
entitled "The Money Machine: How Fannie Mae Wields Power." The highlight: To
prevent the financially-stricken D.C. government from trying to collect some
$300 million in local taxes, Fannie Mae threatens to drop its $3 million in
support for D.C. charities. And the threat works! ...

            
               Deeply Disturbing Ginsburg Quote of the Week:
            

            "Mr. Starr, have you no shame? Facts and law are always subordinated to the
will of the American people."

            --William Ginsburg, attorney for Monica Lewinsky

         
   
   
      
         
            The Flytrap Cure

            Chatterbox sort of likes the idea of a president so desperate to avoid
impeachment, to demonstrate that his private behavior doesn't affect his public
conduct, that he is driven to an orgy of accomplishment. First, peace in
Northern Ireland! Then, a tobacco deal! If Clinton wavers on Social Security
reform--well, we can always release a few of Linda Tripp's tapes! ... We know
you got that hummer, buddy, so you better fix Medicare while you're at it. Then
replenish the ozone layer, democratize China, figure out an efficient way to
store electricity, and solve the Four Color Map Problem, and we'll think
about keeping you on. ... Finally, a cure for the consitutional problem of
second-term lethargy! ...

            
               Now we know: Today's Washingon Post business section carries a
long front-page piece explaining James Johnson's decision to step down as CEO
of Fannie Mae. (See Chatterboxes for 4/13 and 4/9). It turns out that although
the announcement of Johnson's replacement by Clinton budget director Franklin
Raines "surprised many Washington insiders" -- Chatterbox's White House source
said it seemed to happen quickly at the last minute--it was really a
long-planned "crafted departure" that "culminated a process begun several years
ago" when Johnson decided to "limit his tenure with Fannie Mae to a decade."
You see, Johnson also believes in "the enormous importance of an orderly
succession," and desired a long period of "extended overlap with his successor"
to insure "'the smoothest transition possible.'" Plus Raines was ready to go,
and they had to snap him up--even though Raines had wanted to stay in
government until the Social Security problem was solved. ... That's really all
there is too it. A long-planned departure. An orderly succession ... Nothing to
do with, say, the brief exit "window"--the interval between the Paula Jones
dismissal and the Kenneth Starr report-- during which Clinton officials can
leave without looking like rats jumping ship. The Post would have
mentioned that if it were a factor. So it must have nothing to do with it. ...
Just a smooth transition ...

            
               Almost Everything You Need to Know About Washington in One Quote: In
the April 12 Post, Peter Baker reported on White House aides who are
annoyed at former chief of staff Leon Panetta for continuing to urge the
president to come forward and say what happened between him and Monica
Lewinsky. Panetta is contrasted with George Stephanopoulos, the other White
House apostate, who has a lucrative ABC News contract. An anonymous White House
official tells Baker: "The difference with Leon is some people wonder, 'You're
not getting paid for this. Why do you keep doing it?'" ... But if you
are getting paid, treason is OK? ... Maybe Panetta is saying it because
it's what he thinks about an important issue. .... Nyah. Can't be.
...

            
               Gratuitous Automotive Item: Chtterbox says don't give up your
stereotypes of the Japanese as economic super-producers just yet. Consumer
Reports just published its Annual Auto Issue, which contains the most
useful two-page spread in automotive journalism. These pages (60 and 61) rank
the reliability of most new cars sold in America, based on a large reader
survey. (Note this is not a ranking of a car's enjoyability--who reads
Consumer Reports for that?--only of whether the car is likely to break.)
What leaps out from this year's chart is the way Japanese manufacturers have
maintained their edge over Detroit's Big Three. The top six makers are still
all Japanese, and the very best models--such as the Acura Integra, the Honda
Odyssey, the Honda Prelude, the Nissan Maxima. and the Lexus SC300--are still
built in Japan itself, not in the Japanese makers' North American plants. ...
Like many ancient Volvo-bred yuppies, Chatterbox will believe America is back
on top only when Detroit makes a car Chatterbox might actually want to buy. ...
O.K., there's one. The Ford SVT Contour. But its reliability is suspect.
...

            Another news flash from the Auto Issue concerns the sad performance of the
formerly best-selling Ford Taurus since its tragic Gaudi-esque redesign. It's
now one of the least-reliable medium sized cars, with 40 percent more problems
than average. Hey, it may be ugly, but it doesn't work that good either! ...
The Taurus is even sub-Saab---the Saab 900, pilloried in Chatterbox for 3/13,
has improved somewhat. It's now only 20 percent worse than average. ... But the
award for the most depressing performance goes to [drumroll] GM's new minivans!
With 86 percent more problems than average, they're the worst vehicles ranked,
except for GM's own Camaro and Firebird V-8s. ... Meanwhile, the wildly
attractive Audi A4, contrary to all expectations, may actually be reliable.
Consumer Reports ranked it above even the vaunted Toyota Camry (which
slipped a bit, but remains 20 percent better than average). ..."Less Gaudi,
More Audi," is Chatterbox's new motto. ...

            
               Scariest Quote of the Week:
            

            "Voters in the Generation X pool could care less what role model their
president presents. They want someone to help them stop their kids from
smoking."

            --Dick Morris, former Clinton pollster

            You mean they have kids already? Those punks? Chatterbox is feeling
ancient indeed. Maybe it's time to plan an orderly succession. ...

         
   
   
      
         
            Talking Points for the Times!

            To: New York Times Editorial Board

            Re: Your Coming Anti-Workfare Editorials

            The Times has just concluded a four-part, front-page series slamming
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's workfare policies (e.g.,"EVIDENCE IS SCANT
THAT WORKFARE LEADS TO FULL-TIME JOBS"). Even now, presses are stamping out the
capper, the first of what will probably be many righteous editorials denouncing
the program. It happens that workfare is an old hobbyhorse of Chatterbox's.
Chatterbox thinks it's the key to successful welfare reform (which is the key
to solving America's most pressing social problem, the problem of "ghetto
poverty"). And, aside from Milwaukee, New York is the first big city to give
workfare a try. If it can make it there ...

            One point your series made seems indisputable: If what Rachel Swarns
reported is true, Giuliani simply doesn't have an adequate day care system in
place yet. He'll have to do better. As for the rest of the series, let's stick
with the major conceptual problems:

            
               Misconception #1: It's the Overriding Goal of Workfare to Move
People into Private Jobs. Politicians like to say the purpose of welfare
reform is to move people "from welfare to work." That's certainly a
goal. But it's not true that unless welfare reform takes all the people on
welfare and gets them private sector jobs, it's failed. The overall goal of
reform, as President Clinton said in a neolib moment, is to "break the culture
of poverty and dependence." It's a culture that traps the poor in isolated,
fatherless ghettos. It's also a culture that hurts the larger society--not just
those on welfare--by producing crime, destroying urban life, fanning racial
tension, etc. To change that culture, you don't have to get every unmarried
welfare mom into a job. The idea is to establish the principle that every
family has to send somebody into the workforce. Enforce that principle,
and some of those on welfare will go to work. Other mothers may choose to live
with breadwinners and spend time with their children. Other women not on
welfare--and this is the big payoff--may decide not to become single mothers at
all, postponing childbirth until marriage. Eventually, communities of
fatherless welfare families will become communities of intact, working
families. That's the idea, anyway.

            Even if you think the point of welfare reform is to get everyone into a
private job, that's not the immediate goal of workfare. Workfare is
usually only one part of the larger welfare reform plan. Most plans attempt to
"divert" those who apply for welfare into private jobs. They require those who
do apply to search for work. Only those who fail to find private sector jobs
are then offered workfare jobs so they can earn their benefits. Workfare, in
effect, is the employer of last resort. (A fine old liberal notion!) It's crazy
to expect the people who wind up in these last-resort workfare jobs--about
17,000, out of 236,000 adults on welfare in New York City--to be the ones who
will fly out the door into the private sector.

            
               Misconception #2: We should worry because only a third of those who leave
welfare quickly turn up on the tax rolls as workers. The Times has
made a big fuss about a New York state survey showing that "of the legions of
people who came off the welfare rolls in New York City from July 1996 through
March 1997, only 29 percent found full-time or part-time jobs" in the first
full quarter after they left welfare. Yes, we want to know how many more people
are working thanks to welfare reform. But the people welfare reform will push
most successfully into the private sector are those who now never show up at
the welfare office in the first place because they realize they'll do
better just getting a job. The survey completely misses this group.

            For those who do go on welfare, the survey only counts those who then work
for private sector employers who report them to the state for tax purposes. It
doesn't count self-employed laborers, domestic workers and others if they don't
report their income. It doesn't count those whose employers don't fill out the
required forms. Many employers who do file their forms do it late. Experience
with earlier groups of welfare-leavers shows that the 29 percent figure will
rise about 10 more percentage points (to about 40 percent) when these
late-filers eventually comply. Finally, just because someone doesn't get a job
the first quarter doesn't mean they never will. A study of Maryland's reform
discovered that 36 percent of those leaving welfare had earnings in the quarter
they left, but 75 percent had earnings within 2.5 years.

            Even if a single mother leaves the rolls and doesn't get a job,
remember, that doesn't mean reform has failed. She might have moved in with a
man, even gotten married. She might be getting help from friends. If former
recipients were showing up in shelters or on the streets, it would be bad news,
but that doesn't seem to be happening.

            
               Misconception #3: Workfare workers shouldn't do work unionized city
workers used to do. At times, your reporters object that workfarers do
"menial," unskilled, dead-end work. At other times they complain that
workfarers have taken good, desirable union jobs away from others. Which is it?
It can't be both. The truth is that the more the mayor asks workfarers to do
useful work, like street-cleaning, the more they will probably be doing work
regular city workers once did. So? Is the work low paid? Sure. If workfare is
going to be the employer of last resort, it can't pay good, union wages, or
else half the city will go on welfare to get a workfare job. Nor did the
Times show that any regular workers were laid off or fired to make way
for cheaper workfarers.

            Chatterbox will go for now. Give 'em hell!

         
      
   

      
   

      
   

      
   

   

      
   

   





   


   

   

      
   
